THE SONGLINES

For Elizabeth 

IN ALICE SPRINGS - a grid of scorching streets where men in 
long white socks were forever getting in and out of Land 
Cruisers -1 met a Russian who was mapping the sacred sites of 
the Aboriginals. 

His name was Arkady Volchok. He was an Australian citizen. 
He was thirty-three years old. 

His father, Ivan Volchok, was a Cossack from a village near 
Rostov-on-Don, who, in 1942., was arrested and sent with a 
trainload of other Ostarbeiter to work in a German factory. 
One night, somewhere in the Ukraine, he jumped from the 
cattle-car into a field of sunflowers. Soldiers in grey uniforms 
hunted him up and down the long lines of sunflowers, but he 
gave them the slip. Somewhere else, lost between murdering 
armies, he met a girl from Kiev and married her. Together they 
drifted to a forgetful Adelaide suburb, where he rigged up a 
vodka still and fathered three sturdy sons. 

The youngest of these was Arkady. 

Nothing in Arkady's temperament predisposed him to live in 
the hugger-mugger of Anglo-Saxon suburbia or take a conventional 
job. He had a flattish face and a gentle smile, and he 
moved through the bright Australian spaces with the ease of his 
footloose forbears. 

His hair was thick and straight, the colour of straw. His lips 
had cracked in the heat. He did not have the drawn-in lips of so 
many white Australians in the Outback; nor did he swallow his 
words. He rolled his r's in a very Russian way. Only when you 
came up close did you realise how big his bones were. 

He had married, he told me, and had a daughter of six. Yet, 
preferring solitude to domestic chaos, he no longer lived with 
his wife. He had few possessions apart from a harpsichord and a 
shelf of books. 

He was a tireless bushwalker. He thought nothing of setting 
out, with a water-flask and a few bites of food, for a hundredmile 
walk along the Ranges. Then he would come home, out of 
the heat and light, and draw the curtains, and play the music of 
Buxtehude and Bach on the harpsichord. Their orderly progressions, 
he said, conformed to the contours of the Central 
Australian landscape. 

Neither of Arkady's parents had ever read a book in English. 
He delighted them by winning a first-class honours degree, in 
history and philosophy, at Adelaide University. He made them 
sad when he went to work as a school-teacher, on an Aboriginal 
settlement in Walbiri country to the north of Alice Springs. 

He liked the Aboriginals. He liked their grit and tenacity, and 
their artful ways of dealing with the white man. He had learnt, 
or half-learnt, a couple of their languages and had come away 
astonished by their intellectual vigour, their feats of memory 
and their capacity and will to survive. They were not, he 
insisted, a dying race — although they did need help, now and 
then, to get the government and mining companies off their 
backs. 

It was during his time as a school-teacher that Arkady learned 
of the labyrinth of invisible pathways which meander all over 
Australia and are known to Europeans as 'Dreaming-tracks' or 
'Songlines'; to the Aboriginals as the 'Footprints of the Ancestors' 
or the 'Way of the Law'. 

Aboriginal Creation myths tell of the legendary totemic 
beings who had wandered over the continent in the Dreamtime, 
singing out the name of everything that crossed their path — 
birds, animals, plants, rocks, waterholes - and so singing the 
world into existence. 

Arkady was so struck by the beauty of this concept that he 
began to take notes of everything he saw or heard, not for 
publication, but to satisfy his own curiosity. At first, the Walbiri 
Elders mistrusted him, and their answers to his questions were 
evasive. With time, once he had won their confidence, they 
invited him to witness their most secret ceremonies and 
encouraged him to learn their songs. 

One year, an anthropologist from Canberra came to study 
Walbiri systems of land tenure: an envious academic who 
resented Arkady's friendship with the song-men, pumped 
him for information and promptly betrayed a secret he had 
promised to keep. Disgusted by the row that followed, the 
'Russian' threw in his job and went abroad. 

He saw the Buddhist temples of Java, sat with saddhus on the 
ghats of Benares, smoked hashish in Kabul and worked on a 
kibbutz. On the Acropolis in Athens there was a dusting of 
snow and only one other tourist: a Greek girl from Sydney. 

They travelled through Italy, and slept together, and in Paris 
they agreed to get married. 

Having been brought up in a country where there was 
'nothing', Arkady had longed all his life to see the monuments 
of Western civilisation. He was in love. It was springtime. 
Europe should have been wonderful. It left him, to his 
disappointment, feeling flat. 

Often, in Australia, he had had to defend the Aboriginals 
from people who dismissed them as drunken and incompetent 
savages; yet there were times, in the flyblown squalor of a 
Walbiri camp, when he suspected they might be right and 
that his vocation to help the blacks was either wilful selfindulgence 
or a waste of time. 

Now, in a Europe of mindless materialism, his 'old men' 
seemed wiser and more thoughtful than ever. He went to a 
Qantas office and bought two tickets home. He was married, six 
weeks later in Sydney, and took his wife to live in Alice Springs. 

She said she longed to live in the Centre. She said she loved it 
when she got there. After a single summer, in a tin-roofed house 
that heated like a furnace, they began to drift apart. 

The Land Rights Act gave Aboriginal 'owners' the title to 
their country, providing it lay untenanted; and the job Arkady 
invented for himself was to interpret 'tribal law' into the language 
of the Law of The Crown. 

No one knew better that the 'idyllic' days of hunting and 
gathering were over — if, indeed, they were ever that idyllic. 
What could be done for Aboriginals was to preserve their most 
essential liberty: the liberty to remain poor, or, as he phrased it 
more tactfully, the space in which to be poor if they wished to be 
poor. 

Now that he lived alone he liked to spend most of his time 
'out bush'. When he did come to town, he worked from a 
disused newspaper shop-floor where rolls of old newsprint still 
clogged the presses and his sequences of aerial photos had 
spread, like a game of dominoes, over the shabby white walls. 

One sequence showed a three-hundred-mile strip of country 
running roughly due north. This was the suggested route of a 
new Alice to Darwin railway. 

The line, he told me, was going to be the last long stretch of 
track to be laid in Australia; and its chief engineer, a railwayman 
of the old school, had announced that it must also be the 
best. 

The engineer was close to retiring age and concerned for his 
posthumous reputation. He was especially concerned to avoid 
the kind of rumpus that broke out whenever a mining company 
moved its machinery into Aboriginal land. So, promising not to 
destroy a single one of their sacred sites, he had asked their 
representatives to supply him with a survey. 

Arkady's job was to identify the 'traditional landowners'; to 
drive them over their old hunting grounds, even if these now 
belonged to a cattle company; and to get them to reveal which 
rock or soak or ghost-gum was the work of a Dreamtime hero. 

He had already mapped the 150-mile stretch from Alice to 
Middle Bore Station. He had a hundred and fifty to go. 

T warned the engineer he was being a bit rash,' he said. 'But 
that's the way he wanted it.' 

'Why rash?'I asked. 

'Well, if you look at it their way,' he grinned, 'the whole of 
bloody Australia's a sacred site.' 

'Explain,' I said. 

He was on the point of explaining when an Aboriginal girl 
came in with a stack of papers. She was a secretary, a pliant 
brown girl in a brown knitted dress. She smiled and said, 'Hi, 
Ark!' but her smile fell away at the sight of a stranger. 

Arkady lowered his voice. He had warned me earlier how 
Aboriginals hate to hear white men discussing their 'business'. 

'This is a Pom,' he said to the secretary. 'A Pom by the name 
of Bruce.' 

The girl giggled, diffidently, dumped the papers on the desk, 
and dashed for the door. 

'Let's go and get a coffee,' he said. 

So we went to a coffee-shop on Todd Street. 

2 

IN MY CHILDHOOD I never heard the word 'Australia' without 
calling to mind the fumes of the eucalyptus inhaler and an 
incessant red country populated by sheep. 

My father loved to tell, and we to hear, the story of the 
Australian sheep-millionaire who strolled into a Rolls-Royce 
showroom in London; scorned all the smaller models; chose an 
enormous limousine with a plate-glass panel between the 
chauffeur and passengers, and added, cockily, as he counted out 
the cash, 'That'll stop the sheep from breathing down my neck.' 

I also knew, from my great-aunt Ruth, that Australia was the 
country of the Upside-downers. A hole, bored straight through 
the earth from England, would burst out under their feet. 

'Why don't they fall off?' I asked. 

'Gravity,' she whispered. 

She had in her library a book about the continent, and I 
would gaze in wonder at pictures of the koala and kookaburra, 
the platypus and Tasmanian bush-devil, Old Man Kangaroo 
and Yellow Dog Dingo, and Sydney Harbour Bridge. 

But the picture I liked best showed an Aboriginal family on 
the move. They were lean, angular people and they went about 
naked. Their skin was very black, not the glitterblack of negroes 
but matt black, as if the sun had sucked away all possibility of 
reflection. The man had a long forked beard and carried a spear 
or two, and a spear-thrower. The woman carried a dilly-bag 
and a baby at her breast. A small boy strolled beside her — I 
identified myself with him. 

I remember the fantastic homelessness of my first five years. 
My father was in the Navy, at sea. My mother and I would 
shuttle back and forth, on the railways of wartime England, on 
visits to family and friends. 

All the frenzied agitation of the times communicated itself to 
me: the hiss of steam on a fogbound station; the double clu-unk 
of carriage doors closing; the drone of aircraft, the searchlights, 
the sirens; the sound of a mouth-organ along a platform of 
sleeping soldiers. 

Home, if we had one, was a solid black suitcase called the Rev-
Robe, in which there was a corner for my clothes and my Mickey 
Mouse gas-mask. I knew that, once the bombs began to fall, I 
could curl up inside the Rev-Robe, and be safe. 

Sometimes, I would stay for months with my two great-aunts, 
in their terrace house behind the church in Stratford-on-Avon. 
They were old maids. 

Aunt Katie was a painter and had travelled. In Paris she had 
been to a very louche party at the studio of Mr Kees van Dongen. 
On Capri she had seen the bowler hat of a Mr Ulyanov that used 
to bob along the Piccola Marina. 

Aunt Ruth had travelled only once in her life, to Flanders, to lay 
a wreath on a loved one's grave. She had a simple, trusting nature. 
Her cheeks were pale rose-pink and she could blush as sweetly 
and innocently as a young girl. She was very deaf, and I would 
have to yell into her deaf-aid, which looked like a portable radio. 
At her bedside she kept a photograph of her favourite nephew, 
my father, gazing calmly from under the patent peak of his naval 
officer's cap. 

The men on my father's side of the family were either solid and 
sedentary citizens—lawyers, architects, antiquaries —or horizonstruck 
wanderers who had scattered their bones in every corner 
of the earth: Cousin Charlie in Patagonia; Uncle Victor in a 
Yukon gold camp; Uncle Robert in an oriental port; Uncle 
Desmond, of the long fair hair, who vanished without trace in 
Paris; Uncle Walter who died, chanting the suras of the Glorious 
Koran, in a hospital for holy men in Cairo. 

Sometimes, I overheard my aunts discussing these blighted 
destinies; and Aunt Ruth would hug me, as if to forestall my 
following in their footsteps. Yet, from the way she lingered over 
such words as 'Xanadu' or 'Samarkand' or the 'wine-dark sea', I 
think she also felt the trouble of the 'wanderer in her soul'. 

The house was full of cumbersome furniture inherited from the 
days of lofty ceilings and servants. In the drawing-room, there 
were William Morris curtains, a piano, a cabinet of porcelain and 
a canvas of cockle-pickers by Aunt Katie's friend A. E. Russell. 

My own most treasured possession, at the time, was the 
conch shell called Mona, which my father had brought from 
the West Indies. I would ram my face against her sheeny pink 
vulva and listen to the sound of the surf. 

One day, after Aunt Katie had shown me a print of Botticelli's 
Birth of Venus, I prayed and prayed that a beautiful 
blonde young lady would suddenly spew forth from Mona. 

Aunt Ruth never scolded me except once, one evening in 
May 1944, when 1 pissed in the bathwater. I must be one of the 
last children anywhere to be menaced by the spectre of 
Bonaparte. 'If you ever do that again,' she cried, 'Boney will 
get you.' 

I knew what Boney looked like from his porcelain statuette 
in the cabinet: black boots, white breeches, gilded buttons and 
a black bicorn hat. But the drawing Aunt Ruth drew for me — a 
version of one drawn for her, as a child, by her father's friend 
Lawrence Alma-Tadema - showed the furry bicorn only on a 
pair of spindly legs. 

That night, and for weeks to come, I dreamed of meeting 
Boney on the pavement outside the vicarage. His two halves 
would open like a bivalve. Inside, there were rows of black 
fangs and a mass of wiry blue-black hair — into which I fell, 
and woke up screaming. 

On Fridays, Aunt Ruth and I would walk to the parish 
church to make it ready for Sunday service. She would polish 
the brasses, sweep the choir stalls, replace the frontal and 
arrange fresh flowers on the altar - while I clambered into the 
pulpit or held imaginary conversations with Mr Shakespeare. 

Mr Shakespeare would peer from his funerary monument 
on the north side of the chancel. He was a bald man, with 
upturned moustaches. His left hand rested on a scroll of paper, 
and his right hand held a quill. 

I appointed myself the guardian and guide of his tomb, and 
charged G.I.s threepence a tour. The first lines of verse I 
learned by heart were the four lines engraved on his slab: 

Good frend, for Jesus sake, forbeare 
To digge the dust encloased here 
Bleste be ye man yt spares thes stones 
And curst be he yt moves my bones. 

Long afterwards, in Hungary, where I had gone to study the 
archaeology of nomads, I had the luck to witness the opening of 
a Hunnish 'princess's' grave. The girl lay on her back, on a bed 
of black soil, her brittle bones covered with a shower of gold 
plaques, while across her breast, with wings outspread, lay-the 
skeleton of a golden eagle. 

One of the excavators called to some peasant women who 
were haymaking in the field nearby. They dropped their rakes 
and clustered round the gravemouth, crossing themselves 
fumble-handedly, as if to say, 'Leave her. Leave her with her 
lover. Leave her alone with Zeus.' 

'Curst be he . . . ' I seemed to hear Mr Shakespeare calling, 
and for the first time began to wonder if archaeology itself were 
not cursed. 

Whenever the afternoon was fine in Stratford, Aunt Ruth and 
I — with her cocker-spaniel, Amber, straining at his leash would 
go on what she said was Mr Shakespeare's favourite 
walk. We would set off from College Street, past the grain silo, 
past the foaming mill-race, across the Avon by footbridge, and 
follow the path to Weir Brake. 

This was a hazel wood on a slope that tumbled into the river. 
In springtime, primroses and bluebells flowered there. In 
summer it was a tangle of nettles, brambles and purple 
loosestrife, with the muddy water eddying below. 

My aunt assured me this was the spot where Mr Shakespeare 
came to 'tryst' with a young lady. It was the very bank whereon 
the wild thyme blew. But she never explained what a tryst was, 
and, no matter how hard I searched, there were neither thyme 
nor oxlips, although I did find a few nodding violets. 

Much later, when I had read Mr Shakespeare's plays and did 
know what a tryst was, it struck me that Weir Brake was far too 
muddy and prickly for Titania and Bottom to settle on, but an 
excellent spot for Ophelia to take the plunge. 

Aunt Ruth loved reading Shakespeare aloud and, on days 
when the grass was dry, I would dangle my legs over the 
riverbank and listen to her reciting, 'If music be the food of 
love . . . ,' 'The quality of mercy is not strained . . . ,' or 'Full 
fathom five thy father lies.' 

'Full fathom five . . . ' upset me terribly because my father 
was still at sea. I had another recurring dream: that his ship had 
sunk; that I grew gills and a fishy tail, swam down to join him on 
the ocean floor, and saw the pearls that had been his bright blue 
eyes. 

A year or two later, as a change from Mr Shakespeare, my 
aunt would bring an anthology of verse especially chosen for 
travellers, called The Open Road. It had a green buckram 
binding and a flight of gilded swallows on the cover. 

I loved watching swallows. When they arrived in spring, 1 
knew my lungs would soon be free of green phlegm. In autumn, 
when they sat chattering on the telegraph wires, I could almost 
count the days until the eucalyptus inhaler. 

Inside The Open Road there were black and white endpapers 
in the style of Aubrey Beardsley which showed a bright 
path twisting through pine woods. One by one, we went 
through every poem in the book. 

We arose and went to Innisfree. We saw the caverns 
measureless to man. We wandered lonely as a cloud. We tasted 
all the summer's pride, wept for Lycidas, stood in tears among 
the alien corn, and listened to the strident, beckoning music of 
Walt Whitman: 

O Public Road . . . 
You express me better than I can express myself 
You shall be more to me than my poem. 

One day, Aunt Ruth told me our surname had once been 
'Chettewynde', which meant 'the winding path' in Anglo-
Saxon; and the suggestion took root in my head that poetry, my 
own name and the road were, all three, mysteriously connected. 

As for bedtime stories, my favourite was the tale of the coyote 
pup in Ernest Thompson Seton's Lives of the Hunted. 

Coyotito was the runt of a litter whose mother had been shot 
by the cowboy, Wolver Jake. Her brothers and sisters had been 
knocked on the head and her own life spared to give sport to 
Jake's bull-terrier and greyhounds. Her picture, in chains, 
showed the saddest little dog-person I ever saw. Yet Coyotito 
grew up smart and, one morning, after shamming dead, she 
bolted for the wild: there to teach a new generation of coyotes 
the art of avoiding men. 

I cannot now piece together the train of associations that led 
me to connect Coyotito's bid for freedom with the Australian 
Aboriginals' 'Walkabout'. Nor, for that matter, where I first 
heard the expression 'Walkabout'. Yet somehow I picked up an 
image of those 'tame' Blackfellows who, one day, would be 
working happily on a cattle-station: the next, without a word of 
warning and for no good reason, would up sticks and vanish 
into the blue. 

They would step from their work-clothes, and leave: for 
weeks and months and even years, trekking half-way across the 
continent if only to meet a man, then trekking back as if nothing 
had happened. 

I tried to picture their employer's face the moment he found 
them gone. 

He would be a Scot perhaps: a big man with blotchy skin and 
a mouthful of obscenities. I imagined him breakfasting on steak 
and eggs — in the days of food-rationing, we knew that all 
Australians ate a pound of steak for breakfast. Then he would 
march into the blinding sunlight - all Australian sunlight was 
blinding - and shout for his 'boys'. 

Nothing. 

He would shout again. Not a sound but the mocking laugh of 
a kookaburra. He would scan the horizon. Nothing but gum 
trees. He would stalk through the cattle-yards. Nothing there 
either. Then, outside their shacks, he'd find their shirts and hats 
and boots sticking up through their trousers . . . 

3 

ARKADY ORDERED a couple of cappuccinos in the coffee-shop. 
We took them to a table by the window and he began to talk. 

I was dazzled by the speed of his mind, although at times I felt 
he sounded like a man on a public platform, and that much of 
what he said had been said before. 

The Aboriginals had an earthbound philosophy. The earth 
gave life to a man; gave him his food, language and intelligence; 
and the earth took him back when he died. A man's 'own 
country', even an empty stretch of spinifex, was itself a sacred 
ikon that must remain unscarred. 

'Unscarred, you mean, by roads or mines or railways?' 

'To wound the earth', he answered earnestly, 'is to wound 
yourself, and if others wound the earth, they are wounding you. 
The land should be left untouched: as it was in the Dreamtime 
when the Ancestors sang the world into existence.' 

'Rilke', I said, 'had a similar intuition. He also said song was 
existence.' 

'I know,' said Arkady, resting his chin on his hands. '"Third 
Sonnet to Orpheus.'" 

The Aboriginals, he went on, were a people who trod lightly 
over the earth; and the less they took from the earth, the less 
they had to give in return. They had never understood why the 
missionaries forbade their innocent sacrifices. They slaughtered 
no victims, animal or human. Instead, when they wished to 
thank the earth for its gifts, they would simply slit a vein in their 
forearms and let their own blood spatter the ground. 

'Not a heavy price to pay,' he said. 'The wars of the twentieth 
century are the price for having taken too much.' 

'I see,' I nodded doubtfully, 'but could we get back to the 
Songlines?' 

'We could.' 

My reason for coming to Australia was to try to learn for myself, 
and not from other men's books, what a Songline was — and 
how it worked. Obviously, I was not going to get to the heart of 
the matter, nor would I want to. I had asked a friend in Adelaide if 
she knew of an expert. She gave me Arkady's phone number. 

'Do you mind if I use my notebook?' I asked. 

'Go ahead.' 

I pulled from my pocket a black, oilcloth-covered notebook, 
its pages held in place with an elastic band. 
'Nice notebook,' he said. 
'I used to get them in Paris,' I said. 'But now they don't make 
them any more.' 

'Paris?' he repeated, raising an eyebrow as if he'd never heard 
anything so pretentious. 
Then he winked and went on talking. 
To get to grips with the concept of the Dreamtime, he said, you 
had to understand it as an Aboriginal equivalent of the first two 
chapters of Genesis — with one significant difference. 

In Genesis, God first created the 'living things' and then 
fashioned Father Adam from clay. Here in Australia, the 
Ancestors created themselves from clay, hundreds and 
thousands of them, one for each totemic species. 

'So when an Aboriginal tells you, "I have a Wallaby 
Dreaming," he means, "My totem is Wallaby. I am a member of 
the Wallaby Clan.'" 

'So a Dreaming is a clan emblem? A badge to distinguish "us" 
from "them"? "Our country" from "their country"?' 

'Much more than that,' he said. 

Every Wallaby Man believed he was descended from a 
universal Wallaby Father, who was the ancestor of all other 
Wallaby Men and of all living wallabies. Wallabies, therefore; 
were his brothers. To kill one for food was both fratricide and 
cannibalism. 

'Yet,' I persisted, 'the man was no more wallaby than the 
British are lions, the Russians bears, or the Americans bald 
eagles?' 

'Any species', he said 'can be a Dreaming. A virus can be a 
Dreaming. You can have a chickenpox Dreaming, a rain 
Dreaming, a desert-orange Dreaming, a lice Dreaming. In the 
Kimberleys they've now got a money Dreaming.' 

'And the Welsh have leeks, the Scots thistles and Daphne was 
changed into a laurel.' 

'Same old story,' he said. 

He went on to explain how each totemic ancestor, while 
travelling through the country, was thought to have scattered a 
trail of words and musical notes along the line of his footprints, 
and how these Dreaming-tracks lay over the land as 'ways' of 
communication between the most far-flung tribes. 

'A song', he said, 'was both map and direction-finder. 
Providing you knew the song, you could always find your way 
across country.' 

'And would a man on "Walkabout" always be travelling 
down one of the Songlines?' 
'In the old days, yes,' he agreed. 'Nowadays, they go by train 
or car.' 

'Suppose the man strayed from his Songline?' 

'He was trespassing. He might get speared for it.' 

'But as long as he stuck to the track, he'd always find people 
who shared his Dreaming? Who were, in fact, his brothers?' 
'Yes.' 
'From whom he could expect hospitality?' 
'And vice versa.' 
'So song is a kind of passport and meal-ticket?' 
'Again, it's more complicated.' 
In theory, at least, the whole of Australia could be read as a 

musical score. There was hardly a rock or creek in the country 
that could not or had not been sung. One should perhaps 
visualise the Songlines as a spaghetti of Iliads and Odysseys, 
writhing this way and that, in which every 'episode' was 
readable in terms of geology. 

'By episode', I asked, 'you mean "sacred site"?' 

'Ida' 

'The kind of site you're surveying for the railway?' 

'Put it this way,' he said. 'Anywhere in the bush you can point 
to some feature of the landscape and ask the Aboriginal with 
you, "What's the story there?" or "Who's that?" The chances 
are he'll answer "Kangaroo" or "Budgerigar" or "Jew Lizard", 
depending on which Ancestor walked that way.' 

'And the distance between two such sites can be measured as 
a stretch of song?' 

'That', said Arkady, 'is the cause of all my troubles with the 
railway people.' 

It was one thing to persuade a surveyor that a heap of boulders 
were the eggs of the Rainbow Snake, or a lump of reddish 
sandstone was the liver of a speared kangaroo. It was something 
else to convince him that a featureless stretch of gravel was the 
musical equivalent of Beethoven's Opus in . 

By singing the world into existence, he said, the Ancestors had 
been poets in the original sense oipoesis, meaning 'creation'. No 
Aboriginal could conceive that the created world was in any way 
imperfect. His religious life had a single aim: to keep the land the 
way it was and should be. The man who went 'Walkabout' was 
making a ritual journey. He trod in the footprints of his Ancestor. 
He sang the Ancestor's stanzas without changing a word or note 

— and so recreated the Creation. 
'Sometimes,' said Arkady, 'I'll be driving my "old men" 
through the desert, and we'll come to a ridge of sandhills, and 
suddenly they'll all start singing. "What are you mob singing?" 
I'll ask, and they'll say, " Singing up the country, boss. Makes the 
country come up quicker."' 

Aboriginals could not believe the country existed until they 
could see and sing it - j ust as, in the Dreamtime, the country had 
not existed until the Ancestors sang it. 

'So the land', I said, 'must first exist as a concept in the mind? 
Then it must be sung? Only then can it be said to exist?' 

'True.' 

'In other words, "to exist" is "to be perceived"?' 

'Yes.' 

'Sounds suspiciously like Bishop Berkeley's Refutation of 
Matter.' 
'Or Pure Mind Buddhism,' said Arkady, 'which also sees the 
world as an illusion.' 

'Then I suppose these three hundred miles of steel, slicing 
through innumerable songs, are bound to upset your "old 
men's" mental balance?' 

'Yes and no,' he said. 'They're very tough, emotionally, and 
very pragmatic. Besides, they've seen far worse than a railway.' 

Aboriginals believed that all the 'living things' had been made 
in secret beneath the earth's crust, as well as all the white man's 
gear - his aeroplanes, his guns, his Toyota Land Cruisers — and 


every invention that will ever be invented; slumbering below the 
surface, waiting their turn to be called. 

'Perhaps,' I suggested, 'they could sing the railway back into 
the created world of God?' 

'You bet,' said Arkady. 

4 

IT WAS AFTER FIVE. The evening light was raking down the street 
and through the window we could see a party of black boys, in 
chequered shirts and cowboy hats, walking jerkily under the 
poincianas in the direction of the pub. 

The waitress was clearing up the leftovers. Arkady asked for 
more coffee but already she had turned the machine off. He 
looked at his empty cup, and frowned. 

Then he looked up and asked, abruptly, 'What's your interest 
in all this? What do you want here?' 

'I came here to test an idea,' I said. 

'A big idea?' 

'Probably a very obvious idea. But one I have to get out of my 
system.' 

'And?' 

His sudden shift of mood made me nervous. I began to 
explain how I had once tried, unsuccessfully, to write a book 
about nomads. 

'Pastoral nomads?' 

'No,' I said. 'Nomads. "Nomos" is Greek for "pasture". A 
nomad moves from pasture to pasture. A pastoral nomad is a 
pleonasm.' 

'Point taken,' said Arkady. 'Go on. Why nomads?' 

When I was in my twenties, I said, I had a job as an 'expert' on 
modern painting with a well-known firm of art auctioneers. We 
had sale-rooms in London and New York. I was one of the 
bright boys. People said I had a great career, if only I would play 
my cards right. One morning, I woke up blind. 

During the course of the day, the sight returned to the left eye, 
but the right one stayed sluggish and clouded. The eye specialist 
who examined me said there was nothing wrong organically, 
and diagnosed the nature of the trouble. 

'You've been looking too closely at pictures,' he said. 'Why 
don't you swap them for some long horizons?' 

'Why not?' I said. 

'Where would you like to go?' 

'Africa.' 

The chairman of the company said he was sure there was 
something the matter with my eyes, yet couldn't think why I 
had to go to Africa. 
I went to Africa, to the Sudan. My eyes had recovered by 
the time I reached the airport. 

I sailed down the Dongola Reach in a trading felucca. I went 
to the 'Ethiopians', which was a euphemism for brothel. I had 
a narrow escape from a rabid dog. At an understaffed clinic, I 
acted the role of anaesthetist for a Gaesarean birth. I next 
joined up with a geologist who was surveying for minerals in 
the Red Sea Hills. 

This was nomad country — the nomads being the Beja: 
Kipling's 'fuzzy-wuzzies', who didn't give a damn: for the 
Pharaohs of Egypt or the British cavalry at Omdurman. 

The men were tall and lean, and wore sand-coloured cottons 
folded in an X across the chest. With shields of elephant hide 
and 'Crusader' swords dangling from their belts, they would 
come into the villages to trade their meat for grain. They 
looked down on the villagers as though they were some other 
animal. 

In the early light of dawn, as the vultures flexed their wings 
along the rooftops, the geologist and I would watch the men at 
their daily grooming. 

They anointed each other's hair with scented goat's grease 
and then teased it out in corkscrew curls, making a buttery 
parasol which, instead of a turban, prevented their brains from 
going soft. By evening, when the grease had melted, the curls 
bounced back to form a solid pillow. 

Our camel-man was a joker called Mahmoud, whose mop 
of hair was even wider than the others. He began by stealing 
the geological hammer. Then he left his knife for us to steal. 
Then, with hoots of laughter, we swapped them back and, in 
this way, we became great friends. 

When the geologist went back to Khartoum, Mahmoud 
took me off into the desert to look for rock-paintings. 

The country to the east of Derudeb was bleached and sere, and 
there were long grey cliffs and dom palms growing in the wadis. 
The plains were spotted with flat-topped acacias, leafless at this 
season, with long white thorns like icicles and a dusting of yellow 
flowers. At night, lying awake under the stars, the cities of the 
West seemed sad and alien - and the pretensions of the 'art 
world' idiotic. Yet here I had a sense of homecoming. 

Mahmoud instructed me in the art of reading footprints in the 
sand: gazelles, jackals, foxes, women. We tracked and sighted a 
herd of wild asses. One night, we heard the cough of a leopard 
close by. One morning, he lopped off the head of a puff-adder 
which had curled up under my sleeping-bag and presented me 
with its body on the tip of his sword blade. I never felt safer with 
anyone or, at the same time, more inadequate. 

We had three camels, two for riding and one for waterskins, yet 
usually we preferred to walk. He went barefoot; I was in boots. I 
never saw anything like the lightness of his step and, as he walked, 
he sang: a song, usually, about a girl from the Wadi Hammamat 
who was lovely as a green parakeet. The camels were his only 
property. He had no flocks and wanted none. He was immune to 
everything we would call 'progress'. 

We found our rock-paintings: red ochre pin men scrawled on 
the overhang of a rock. Nearby there was a long flat boulder with 
a cleft up one end and its surface pocked with cup-marks. This, 
said Mahmoud, was the Dragon with its head cut off by Ali. 

He asked me, with a wicked grin, whether I was a Believer. In 
two weeks I never saw him pray. 

Later, when I went back to England, I found a photo of a 
'fuzzy-wuzzy' carved in relief on an Egyptian tomb of the Twelfth 
Dynasty at Beni Hassan: a pitiful, emaciated figure, like the 
pictures of victims in the Sahel drought, and recognisably the 
same as Mahmoud. 

The Pharaohs had vanished: Mahmoud and his people had 
lasted. I felt I had to know the secret of their timeless and 
irreverent vitality. 

I quit my job in the 'art world' and went back to the dry places: 
alone, travelling light. The names of the tribes! travelled among 
are unimportant: Rguibat, Quashgai, Taimanni, Turkomen, 
Bororo, Tuareg — people whose journeys, unlike my own, had 
neither beginning nor end. 

I slept in black tents, blue tents, skin tents, yurts of felt and 
windbreaks of thorns. One night, caught in a sandstorm in the 
Western Sahara, I understood Muhammed's dictum, 'A journey 
is a fragment of Hell.' 

The more I read, the more convinced I became that nomads 
had been the crankhandle of history, if for no other reason than 
that the great monotheisms had, all of them, surfaced from the 
pastoral milieu . . . 

Arkady was looking out of the window. 

5 

A BATTERED RED TRUCK had drawn up on the sidewalk and 
parked. Five black women sat huddled in the back, among a 
heap of bundles and jerry cans. Their frocks and headscarves 
were covered with dust. The driver was a hefty fellow with a 
beer stomach and a greasy felt hat rammed down over a tangle 
of hair. He leaned from the door of the cab and started shouting 
at the passengers. Then a gangly old man got out and pointed to 
an object stuck in among the bundles. 

One of the women handed him a tubular thing wrapped in 
clear plastic. The old man took it and, as he turned round, 
Arkady recognised him. 

'It's my old friend Stan,' he said. 'From Popanji.' 

We went out on to the street and Arkady hugged Old Stan, 
and Stan looked anxious that either he or the thing in plastic 
would get crushed, and when Arkady unhugged him he really 
looked relieved. 

I stood in the doorway, watching. 

The old man had clouded red eyes and a dirty yellow shirt, 
and his beard and hairy chest resembled smoke. 
'So what you got there, Stan?' asked Arkady. 
'Painting,' Stan said, smiling sheepishly. 
'What you going to do with him?' 
'Sell him.' 
Stan was a Pintupi elder. The hefty fellow was Stan's son, 

Albert. The family had driven into town to sell one of Stan's 
paintings to Mrs,Lacey, the owner of the Desert Bookstore and 
Art Gallery. 

'Come on,' Arkady jerked his thumb at the package. 'Let's 
have a see!' 
But Old Stan turned his mouth down at the corners, tightened 
his fingers and mumbled, 'Have to show him first to Mrs Lacey.' 

The coffee-shop was closing. The girl had piled the chairs on 
the tables and was vacuuming the carpet. We paid the bill and 
walked out. Albert leaned against the truck and talked to the 
ladies. We walked along the sidewalk to the bookstore. 

The Pintupi were the last 'wild tribe' to be brought in out of the 
Western Desert and introduced to white civilisation. Until the 
late 1950s, they had continued to hunt and forage, naked in the 
sandhills, as they had hunted for at least ten thousand years. 

They were a carefree and open-minded people, not given to 
the harsher initiation rites of more sedentary tribes. The men 
hunted kangaroo and emu. The women gathered seeds and 
roots and edible grubs. In winter, they sheltered behind 
windbreaks of spinifex; and even in the searing heat they 
seldom went without water. They valued a pair of strong legs 
above everything, and they were always laughing. The few 
whites who travelled among them were amazed to find their 
babies fat and healthy. 

The government, however, took the view that Men of the 
Stone Age must be saved — for Christ, if need be. Besides, the 
Western Desert was needed for mining operations, possibly for 
nuclear tests. An order went out to round up the Pintupi in army 
trucks, and settle them on government stations. Many were sent 
to Popanji, a settlement to the west of Alice Springs, where they 
died of epidemics, squabbled with the men of other tribes, took 
to the bottle, and knifed each other. 

Even in captivity, Pintupi mothers, like good mothers everywhere, 
tell stories to their children about the origin of animals: 

How the Echidna got its spines . . . Why the Emu cannot fly . . . 
Why the Crow is glossy black . . . And as Kipling illustrated the 
Just So Stories with his own line drawings, so the Aboriginal 
mother makes drawings in the sand to illustrate the wanderings 
of the Dreamtime heroes. 

She tells her tale in a patter of staccato bursts and, at the same 
time, traces the Ancestor's 'footprints' by running her first and 
second fingers, one after the other, in a double dotted line along 
the ground. She erases each scene with the palm of her hand 
and, finally, makes a circle with a line passing through it — 
something like a capital Q. 

This marks the spot where the Ancestor, exhausted by the 
labours of Creation, has gone 'back in'. 

The sand drawings done for children are but sketches or 
'open versions' of real drawings representing the real Ancestors, 
which are only done at secret ceremonies and must only be seen 
by initiates. All the same, it is through the 'sketches' that the 
young learn to orient themselves to their land, its mythology 
and resources. 

Some years ago, when the violence and drunkenness 
threatened to get out of hand, a white adviser hit on the idea of 
supplying the Pintupi with artists' materials and getting them to 
transfer their Dreamings on to canvas. 

The result was an instant, Australian school of abstract 
painting. 

Old Stan Tjakamarra had been painting for eight years. 
Whenever he finished a composition, he would bring it to the 
Desert Bookstore and Mrs Lacey would deduct the cost of his 
materials and pay him a lump sum in cash. 

6 

I LIKED ENID LACEY. I had already spent a couple of hours in the 
Bookstore. She certainly knew how to sell books. She had read 
almost every book about Central Australia and tried to stock 
every title in print. In the room which served as an art gallery, 
she had two easy chairs for customers. 'Read as much as you 
like,' she'd say. 'No obligation!' - knowing damn well, of 
course, that once you sat in that chair, you couldn't go away 
without buying. 

She was an Old Territorian in her late sixties. Her nose and 
chin were excessively pointed: her hair was auburn, from the 
bottle. She wore two pairs of spectacles on chains and a pair of 
opal bracelets around her sun-withered wrists. 'Opals', she said 
to me, 'have brought me nothing but luck.' 

Her father had been manager of a cattle station near Tennant 
Creek. She had lived with Aboriginals all her life. She would 
stand for no nonsense, and secretly adored them. 

She had known all the older generation of Australian 
anthropologists and didn't think much of the new ones: the 
'jargon-mongers', as she called them. The truth was that, 
though she tried to keep abreast of the latest theories, though 
she battled with the books of Levi-Strauss, she never made 
much headway. For all that, when Aboriginal affairs were up 
for discussion, she would assume her best pontifical manner, 
changing pronouns from T to 'We', not the royal 'We' but 'We' 
meaning the 'body of scientific opinion'. 

She had been among the first to see the merit of Pintupi 
painting. 

Being a shrewd businesswoman, she knew when to give 
credit to an artist, when to withhold it and to refuse payment 
altogether if the artist seemed set on a blinder. So when 
if one of her 'boys' turned up, doddery on his feet, at closing 
time - which, at the Frazer Arms, was opening time - she'd 
click her tongue and say, 'Dearie me! I can't find the key 
to the cash-box. You'll have to come back in the morning.' 
And when, next morning, the artist came back, grateful not 
to have drunk away his earnings, she'd waggle her finger 
grimly, and say, 'You're going home? Now? Aren't you?' 
'Yes, mam!' he'd say, and she'd add a little extra for the wife 
and kids. 

Mrs Lacey paid far less for paintings than galleries in Sydney 
or Melbourne, but then she charged far less for paintings and 
the paintings always sold. 

Sometimes, a white welfare worker would accuse her of 
'ripping off the artists: but money from Sydney or Melbourne 
had a way of getting siphoned off into Aboriginal co-operatives, 
whereas Mrs Lacey paid cash, on the nail. Her 'boys' 
knew a deal when they saw one and kept coming back to the 
Bookstore. 

We followed Stan inside. 

'You're late, silly!' Mrs Lacey adjusted her spectacles. 

He was edging towards her desk, between two customers and 
the bookshelf. 
'I said to come Tuesday,' she said. 'I had the man in from 
Adelaide yesterday. Now we'll have to wait another month.' 

The customers were a couple of American tourists, who were 
deciding which of two colour-plate books to buy. The man had 
a tanned and freckled face and wore blue Bermudas and a 
yellow sports shirt. The woman was blonde, nice-looking but a 
little drawn, and dressed in a red batik smock printed with 
Aboriginal motifs. The books were Australian Dreaming and 
Tales of the Dreamtime. 

Old Stan laid the package on Mrs Lacey's desk. His head 
swayed to and fro as he muttered some excuse. His musty smell 
filled the room. 

'Idiot!' Mrs Lacey raised the pitch of her voice. 'I've told you a 
thousand times. The man from Adelaide doesn't want Gideon's 
paintings. He wants yours.' 

Arkady and I kept our distance, at the back, by the shelves of 
Aboriginal studies. The Americans had perked up, and were 
listening. 

'I know there's no accounting for taste,' Mrs Lacey continued. 

'He says you're the best painter at Popanji. He's a big collector. 
He should know.' 

'Is that so?' asked the American man. 

'It is,' said Mrs Lacey. 'I can sell anything Mr Tjakamarra sets 
his hand to.' 
'Could we see?' asked the American woman. 'Please?' 
'I couldn't say,' Mrs Lacey replied. 'You'll have to ask the 
artist.' 

'Could we?' 

'Can they?' 

Stan trembled, hunched his shoulders, and covered his face 
with his hands. 
'You can,' said Mrs Lacey, smiling sweetly and snipping at 
the plastic with her scissors. 
Stan withdrew the fingers from his face and, taking hold of 
one edge of the canvas, helped Mrs Lacey unroll it. 

The painting was about four foot by three and had a 
background of pointillist dots in varying shades of ochre. In 
the centre there was a big blue circle with several smaller circles 
scattered around it. Each circle had a scarlet rim around the 
perimeter and, connecting them, was a maze of wiggly, 
flamingo-pink lines that looked a bit like intestines. 

Mrs Lacey switched to her second pair of glasses and said, 
'What you got here, Stan?' 

'Honey-ant,' he whispered in a hoarse voice. 

'The honey-ant', she turned to the Americans, 'is one of the 
totems at Popanji. This painting's a honey-ant Dreaming.' 

'I think it's beautiful,' said the American woman, thoughtfully. 

'Like it's an ordinary ant?' asked the American man. 'Like a 
termite ant?' 

'No, no,' said Mrs Lacey. 'A honey-ant's something very 
special. Honey-ants feed on mulga sap. Mulga, that's a tree we 
have here in the desert. The ants grow honey-sacks on their rear 
ends. They look like clear plastic bubbles.' 

'Is that so?' the man said. 

'I've eaten them,' said Mrs Lacey. 'Delicious!' 

'Yes,' sighed the American woman. She had fixed her gaze on 
the painting. 'In its own way, it is truly beautiful!' 

'But I can't see any ants in this painting,' the man said. 'You 

mean it's like . . . like it's a painting of an ant's nest? Like those 
pink tubes are passages?' 
'No,' Mrs Lacey looked a little discouraged. 'The painting 
shows the journey of the Honey-ant Ancestor.' 
'Like it's a route-map?' he grinned. 'Yeah, I thought jt looked 
like a route-map.' 

'Exactly,' said Mrs Lacey. 

The American wife, meanwhile, was opening and closing her 
eyes to see what impression the painting would make on her 
when, finally, she kept them open. 

'Beautiful,' she repeated. 

'Now, sir!' the man addressed himself to Stan. 'Do you eat 
these honey-ants yourself?' 
Stan nodded. 
'No! No!' the wife shrilled. 'I told you this morning. You do 

not eat your own totem! You could be killed for eating your 
Ancestor!' 
'Dearest, this gentleman says he does eat honey-ants. Is that 
correct, sir?' 

Stan continued to nod. 

'I'm confused,' said the woman in an exasperated tone. 'You 
mean that Honey-ant is not your Dreaming?' 
Stan shook his head. 
'Then what is your Dreaming?' 
The old man quivered like a schoolboy forced to betray a 

secret, and managed to wheeze the word 'Emu'. 

'Oh, I am so confused,' the woman bit her lip in disappointment. 

She liked this soft-mouthed old man in his yellow shirt. She 
liked to think of the honey-ants dreaming their way across the 
desert with the bright sun shining on their honey-sacks. She had 
loved the painting. She wanted to own it, to have him sign it, 
and now she'd have to think again. 

'Do you think', she mouthed her words slowly and carefully, 
'that if we deposited the money with Mrs — ?' 

'Lacey,' said Mrs Lacey. 

' . . . that you could paint us an Emu Dreaming and send 
it. . . have Mrs Lacey send it to us in the United States?' 

'No,' Mrs Lacey interrupted. 'He could not. No artist paints 
his own Dreaming. It's too powerful. It might kill him.' 

'Now I am totally confused,' the woman wrung her hands. 
'You mean he can't paint his own Dreaming but he can paint 
somebody else's?' 

'I get it,' said the husband, brightening. 'Like he can't eat 
emus but he can eat honey-ants?' 

'You've got it,' Mrs Lacey said. 'Mr Tjakamarra cannot paint 
an Emu Dreaming because an emu is his paternal totem and it 
would be sacrilege to do so. He can paint honey-ant because 
that is the totem of his mother's brother's son. That's right, isn't 
it, Stan? Gideon's Dreaming is honey-ant?' 

Stan blinked and said, 'Right!' 
'Gideon', she continued, 'is Stan's ritual manager. They both 
tell each other what they can and cannot paint.' 

'I think I understand,' said the American woman, doubtfully. 
But she still looked quite bewildered and took time to compose 
her next thought. 

'You said that this Mr Gideon is an artist too?' 

'He is,' Mrs Lacey agreed. 

'And he paints Emu Dreamings?' 

'He does.' 

'Goodee!' the woman laughed, unexpectedly, and clapped 
her hands. 'We could buy one of each and hang them as a pair.' 

'Now, dearest,' said the husband in an effort to calm her. 
'First, we have to ascertain if this honey-ant painting is for 
sale. And if so, how much?' 

Mrs Lacey fluttered her eyelashes and said, archly, T couldn't 
say. You'll have to ask the artist.' 

Stan rolled the whites of his eyes to the ceiling and rustled his 
lips. Obviously, he was thinking of a price - the price he'd get 
from Mrs Lacey — and doubling it. Obviously he and Mrs Lacey 
had been through this rigmarole before. He then lowered his 
head and said, 'Four hundred fifty.' 

'Australian dollars,' Mrs Lacey chipped in. 'Of course, I'll 
have to charge my commission. Ten per cent! That's only fair. 
And I'll have to add twenty for the paint and canvas.' 

'Per cent?' 

'Dollars.' 

'Fair enough,' said the man, looking rather relieved. 

'It is beautiful,' the woman said. 

'Are you happy now?' he asked her in a soothing voice. 

'I am,' she said. 'I am so happy.' 
'Can I pay American Express?' he asked. 
'Surely,' said Mrs Lacey. 'As long as you don't mind paying 
their commission.' 
'Fair enough,' the man gulped. 'But now I want to know 
what's going on. In the painting, I mean.' 
Arkady and I crept up behind the Americans and watched 
Old Stan point his bony finger at the large blue circle on the 
canvas. 

It was the Eternal Home, he explained, of the Honey-ant 
Ancestor at Tatata. And suddenly it was as though we could see 
the row on row of honey-ants, their bodies striped and 
gleaming, bursting with nectar in their cells beneath the roots of 
the mulga tree. We saw the ring of flame-red earth around the 
entrance to their nest, and the routes of their migration as they 
spread to other places. 

'The circles', Mrs Lacey added helpfully, 'are honey-ant 
ceremonial centres. The "tubes", as you call them, are 
Dreaming-tracks.' 

The American man was captivated. 'And can we go and look 
for these Dreaming-tracks? Out there, I mean? Like at Ayer's 
Rock? Some place like that?' 

'They can,' she said. 'You can't.' 

'You mean they're invisible?' 

'To you. Not to them.' 

'Then where are they?' 

'Everywhere,' she said. 'For all I know there's a Dreamingtrack 
running right through the middle of my shop.' 

'Spooky,' the wife giggled. 

'And only they can see it?' 

'Or sing it,' Mrs Lacey said. 'You can't have a track without a 

song.' 
'And these tracks run every place?' the man asked. 'All over 
Australia?' 
'Yes,' said Mrs Lacey, sighing with satisfaction at having 
found a catchy phrase. 'The song and the land are one.' 

'Amazing!' he said. 

The American woman had pulled out her handkerchief and 
was dabbing the corners of her eyes. I thought for one moment 
she was going to kiss Old Stan. She knew the painting was a 
thing done for white men, but he had given her a glimpse of 
something rare and strange, and for that she was very grateful. 

Mrs Lacey readjusted her spectacles to fill out the American 
Express form. Arkady waved goodbye to Stan and we heard the 
triumphant rrumpff of the machine as we went out on to the 
street. 

'What a woman!'I said. 

'Some nerve,' said Arkady. 'Come on. Let's go and get a 
drink.' 

I WAS WEARING rubber thongs and, since saloon bars all over 
Alice posted notices reading 'No Thongs' - with a view to 
discouraging Abos — we went to the public bar of the Frazer 
Arms. 

Alice is not a very cheerful town either by day or night. 
Old-timers can remember Todd Street in the days of horses and 
hitching posts. It has since become a dreary, americanised strip 
of travel agents, souvenir shops and soda fountains. One shop 
was selling stuffed koala-bear dolls and t-shirts with 'Alice 
Springs' written in flies. In the newsagent's, they were selling 
copies of a book called Red over White. Its author, a former 
Marxist, insisted that the Aboriginal Land Rights Movement 
was a 'front' for Soviet expansion in Australia. 

'Which makes me', said Arkady, 'one of the leading suspects.' 

Outside the pub, there was an off-licence and the boys we saw 
earlier were lurching round it. In the middle of the street a 
battered eucalyptus reared its trunk up through the asphalt. 

'Sacred tree,' he said. 'Sacred to the Caterpillar Dreaming and 
a dangerous traffic hazard.' 

Inside, the public bar was noisy and crowded with blacks and 
whites. The seven-foot barman was supposed to be the best 
bouncer in town. There were puddles of beer on the linoleum, 
wine-red curtains in the windows, and a disorder of fibreglass 
chairs. 

An obese, bearded Aboriginal sat scratching the bites on his 
belly, and had set a buttock on each of two bar-stools. An 
angular woman sat beside him. There was a beermat stuck into 
her purple knitted cap. Her eyes were closed and she was 
giggling hysterically. 

'The gang's all here,' said Arkady. 

'Who?' 

'My mates from the Pintupi Council. Come on. Let me 
introduce you to the Chairman.' 

We bought our beers and threaded through the drinkers to 
where the Chairman, in a booming voice, was haranguing a 
knot of admirers. He was a huge, very dark-skinned man, in 
jeans, a black leather jacket, black leather hat and a studded 
knuckle-duster round his wrist. He extended a smile full of 
teeth, locked my hand in a fraternal handshake, and said, 
'Man!' 

I said, 'Man!' back and watched the pink tip of my thumb 
poking up out of his fist. 

'Man!'he said. 

'Man!'I said. 

'Man!' he said. 

I said nothing. I felt that if I said 'Man!' a third time, we'd go 
on saying 'Man!' indefinitely. 
I looked away. The pressure of his grip decreased and, in the 
end, I got my crushed hand free. 

The Chairman went on telling the story he'd interrupted for 
my benefit: about his habit of shooting the padlocks off cattlestation 
gates. His listeners found this very amusing. 

I then tried talking to an urban activist, up here on a visit from 
Sydney. Or rather, since he averted his face, I found myself 
talking to the Aboriginal flag dangling as an earring from his left 
lobe. 

To begin with, I got no reaction other than the odd wobble of 
the flag. Then the face swivelled round and started speaking, 
'Are you English?' 

'Yes.' 

'Why don't you go back home?' 

He spoke slowly, in clipped syllables. 

'I just arrived,' I said. 

T mean all of you.' 

'All of who?' 

'White men,' he said. 

The whites had stolen his country, he said. Their presence in 
Australia was illegal. His people had never ceded one square 
inch of territory. They had never signed a treaty. All Eur.opeans 
should go back where they came from. 

'What about the Lebanese?' I asked. 

'They must go back to Lebanon.' 
'I see,' I said, but the interview had come to an end, and the 
face swivelled back to its previous position. 

I next caught the eye of an attractive fair-haired woman and 
winked. She winked back and we both sidled round the edge of 
the group. 

'Having a hard time with the Leader?' she whispered. 

'No,' I said. 'Instructive.' 

Her name was Marian. She had driven into town only half an 
hour earlier, from Walbiri country, where she was working on 
a women's land claim. 

She had level blue eyes and looked very innocent and happy in 
a skimpy, flower-printed dress. There were crescents of red dirt 
under her fingernails and the dust had given a smooth bronzelike 
sheen to her skin. Her breasts were firm and her arms were 
solid and cylindrical. She had slashed the sleeves of the dress to 
allow the air to circulate freely under her armpits. 

She and Arkady had been teachers at the same school in the 
bush. From the way she kept glancing at his blond thatch, 
shining in a spotlight, I guessed they must once have been lovers. 

He was wearing a sky-blue shirt and baggy fatigue pants. 

'How long have you known Ark?' she asked. 

'All of two days,' I said. 

I mentioned the name of the girl we both knew in Adelaide. 
She lowered her eyelids and blushed. 
'He's a bit of a saint,' she said. 
'I know it,' I said. 'A Russian saint' 
I could have gone on talking to Marian, were it not for a 

grating voice at my left elbow. 'And what brings you to the 
Territory?' 

I looked round to see a wiry, prickle-mouthed white in his 
thirties. His pumped-up biceps and sleeveless grey sweatshirt 
announced him as a Gym Bore. 

'Looking round,' I said. 

'Anything special?' 

'I want to find out about the Aboriginal Songlines.' 

'How long are you staying?' 

'Couple of months, maybe.' 

'Are you attached to any body?' 

'My own.' 

'And what makes you think you can show up from Merrie 
Old England and clean up on sacred knowledge?' 
'I don't want to clean up on sacred knowledge. I want to 
know how a Songline works.' ( 

'You're a writer?' 

'Of sorts.' 

'Published?' 

'Yes.' 

'Science fiction?' 

'I hate science fiction.' 

'Look,' said the Gym Bore, 'you're wasting your time, mate. 
I've lived ten years in the Territory. I know these Elders. They 
are not going to tell you anything.' 
His glass was empty. The one way to discourage this conversation 
was to buy the man a drink. 

'No thanks,' he lifted his chin. 'I'm all right.' 

I winked again at Marian, who was trying to suppress a fit of 
giggles. The other glasses were empty, so I offered to pay for a 
round. I went to the bar and gave orders for 'schooners' and 
'middies'. I ordered for the Gym Bore, whether he liked it or not. 
Arkady came over to help me with the glasses. 'I say!' he 

grinned. 'You are having fun.' 

I paid and we carried them over. 

'Say when you want to get out of here,' he whispered. 'We 
can go over to my place.' 

'Ready when you are.' 

The Gym Bore winced as he took the glass, and said, 'Thank 
you, mate.' 

The Chairman took his without a word. 

We drank up. Arkady kissed Marian on the lips and said, 
'See you later.' The Gym Bore put his hand in mine and said, 
'See you around, mate.' 

We went outside. 

'Who was that?' I asked. 

'Bad news,' said Arkady. 

The town was quiet in the dusk. An orange rim smouldered 
along the line of the MacDonnell Ranges. 
'How did you like the Frazer Arms?' he asked. 
'I liked it,' I said. 'It was friendly.' 
It was friendlier, anyway, than the pub in Katherine. 

8 

I HAD HAD TO CHANGE buses in Katherine, on my way down to 
Alice from the Kimberleys. 

It was lunchtime. The pub was full of truckies and construction 
workers, drinking beer and eating pasties. Most of them 
were wearing the standard uniform of the Outback male: desert 
boots, 'navvy' singlets to show off their tattoos, yellow hardhats 
and 'stubbies', which are green, tight-fitting, zipless shorts. 
And the first thing you saw, pushing past the frosted glass door, 
was a continuous row of hairy red legs and bottle-green 
buttocks. 

Katherine is a stopover for tourists who come to see its 
famous Gorge. The Gorge was designated a National Park, but 
some Land Rights lawyers found a flaw in the legal documents 
and were claiming it back for the blacks. There was a lot of illfeeling 
in the town. 

I went to the men's room and, in the passage, a black whore 
pressed her nipples against my shirt and said, 'You want me, 
darling?' 

'No.' 

In the time I took to piss, she had already attached herself to a 
stringy little man on a bar-stool. He had bulging veins on his 
forearm, and a Park Warden's badge on his shirt. 

'Nah!' he sneered. 'Yer dirty Gin! You couldn't excite me. I 
got me missus. But if you sat on the bar here, and spread your 
legs apart, I'd probably stick a bottle up yer.' 

I took my drink and went to the far end of the room. I got 
talking to a Spaniard. He was short, bald and sweaty, and his 
voice was high-pitched and hysterical. He was the town baker. 
A few feet away from us, two Aboriginals were starting, very 
slowly, to fight. 

The older Aboriginal had a crinkled forehead and a crimson 

shirt open to the navel. The other was a scrawny boy in skintight 
orange pants. The man was drunker than the boy, and 
could scarcely stand. He supported himself by propping his 
elbows on his stool. The boy was shrieking blue murder and 
frothing from the sides of his mouth. 

The baker dug me in the ribs. 'I come from Salamanca,' he 
screeched. 'Is like a bullfight, no?' 

Someone else shouted, 'The Boongs are fighting,' although 
they weren't fighting — yet. But the drinkers, jeering and 
cheering, began shifting down the bar to get a look. 

Gently, almost with a caress, the Aboriginal man tipped the 
boy's glass from his hand, and it fell and shattered on the floor. 
The boy stooped, picked up the broken base and held it like a 
dagger in his palm. 

The truckie on the next stool poured out the contents of 
his own glass, smashed its rim against the lip of the counter, 
and shoved it in the older man's hand. 'Go on,' he said, 
encouragingly. 'Give it 'im.' 

The boy lunged forward with his glass, but the man parried 
him with a flick of the wrist. Both had drawn blood. 
'Ole!' shouted the Spanish baker, his face contorted into a 
grimace. 'Ole! Ole! Ole!' 

The bouncer vaulted over the bar and dragged the two 
Aboriginals outside on to the sidewalk, across the tarmac, to an 
island in the highway where they lay, side by side, bleeding 
beneath the pink oleanders while the road-trains from Darwin 
rumbled by. 

I walked away but the Spaniard followed me. 

'They are best friends,' he said. 'No?' 

9 

I WAS HOPING for an early night, but Arkady had asked me to a 
barbecue with some friends on the far side of town. We had an 
hour or more to kill. We bought a bottle of chilled white wine 
from the off-licence. 

Arkady lived in a rented studio apartment above a row of 
lock-up garages, in the lot behind the supermarket. The metal 
rail of the stairway was still hot from the sun. The airconditioner 
was on and, as he unlocked the door, a cool draught 
blew in our faces. There was a note shoved through on to the 
mat. He switched on the light, and read. 

'Not before time,' he mumbled. 

'What's that?' I asked. 

He explained how one of the Kaititj elders, an old man called 
Alan Nakumurra, had been holding up the survey for the last 
four weeks. He was the last male survivor of his clan and 
'traditional owner' of the country north of Middle Bore Station. 
The railway surveyors had been champing to peg out this 
particular stretch of track. Arkady had put them off till Alan 
could be found. 

'Where did he go?' 

'Where do you think?' he laughed. 'He went Walkabout.' 

'What happened to the others?' 

'Which others?' 

'The others of his clan.' 

'Shot,' said Arkady. 'By police patrols in the twenties.' 

The room was neat and white. There was a juice-extractor on 
the bar of the kitchenette and a basket of oranges beside it. Some 
Indonesian cloths and cushions were strewn over a mattress on 
the floor. Pages of sheet music, of The Well-tempered Clavier, 
layopen on top of the harpsichord. 

Arkady uncorked the bottle, poured two glasses, and, while I 
glanced at the contents of his bookshelf, he put through a call to 
his boss. 

He talked business for a minute or two and then said there 
was this Pom in town who wanted to go 'out bush' with the 
survey team . . . No, not a journalist. . . Yes, as Poms went, 
relatively harmless . . . No, not a photographer . . . No, not 
interested in watching rituals . . . No, not tomorrow . . .the day 
after . . . 

There was a pause. You could almost hear the man thinking 
on the far end of the line. Then Arkady smiled and gave a 
'thumbs up' sign. 

'You're on,' he said, and replaced the receiver. 

He next called the truck-hire company to have a vehicle for 
Wednesday morning. 'Make it a Land Cruiser,' he said. 'We 
might get rain.' 

On the bookshelf there were Russian classics, books on the 
Pre-Socratics and a number of Aboriginal studies. Among the 
latter were two of my favourites: Theodore Strehlow's Aranda 
Traditions and Songs of Central Australia. 

Arkady opened a tin of cashew nuts and we both sat, crosslegged 
on the mattress. 

'Nazdorovye!' He raised his glass. 

'Nazdorovye!'We clinked glasses. 

He unfolded his legs once more, pulled a photo album from 
the shelf and started turning the pages. 

The first pictures were all colour snapshots, mostly of 
himself, the record of any young Australian on his first trip 
overseas: Arkady on a beach in Bali; Arkady at Kibbutz Hulda; 
Arkady beside the temple at Sounion; Arkady with his 
wife-to-be in Venice, with pigeons; Arkady back in Alice with 
the wife and baby. 

He then flipped to the back of the album, to a faded 
black-and-white picture: of a youngish couple, on a ship's deck, 
with a lifeboat in the background. 'Mum and Dad,' he said. 
'May '47 when the ship docked at Aden.' 

I leaned forward to get a close look. The man was short, with 
a flat, powerful body, solid black eyebrows and slanting 
cheekbones. A wedge of dark hair showed in the neck of his 
shirt. His baggy trousers were cinched in at the waist and looked 
several sizes too big. 


The woman was taller and shapely, in a simple smock dress, 
and had pale hair tied up in braids. Her plump arm bulged 
over the stanchion rail. They screwed up their faces to the 
sunlight. 

Lower down the same page, there was a second photo of the 
man: shrunken and grey now, standing beside a wicket fence, 
in a garden of cabbages that could only be Russian cabbages. 
Beside him, forming a group, were a round peasant woman 
and two young bruisers in karakul hats and boots. 

'That's my auntie,' said Arkady. 'And those are my Cossack 
cousins.' 

The karakul hats took me back to a stifling summer afternoon 
in Kiev and the memory of a squadron of Cossack 
cavalry exercising down a cobbled street: glossy black horses; 
scarlet capes, high hats worn at an angle; and the sour, 
resentful faces of the crowd. 

The date was August 1968, a month before the invasion of 
Czechoslovakia. All through that summer there had been 
rumours of unrest in the Ukraine. 

Arkady refilled the glasses and we went on talking of 
Cossacks: of 'Kazakh' and 'Cossack'; the Cossack as mercenary 
and Cossack as rebel; of Yermak the Cossack and the 
conquest of Siberia; of Pugachev and Stenka Razin; Makhno 
and Budenny's Red Cavalry. I happened to touch on Von 
Pannwitz's Cossack Brigade, which fought for the Germans 
against the Soviet Army. 

'Funny you should mention Von Pannwitz,' he said. 

In 1945, his parents had found themselves in Austria, in the 
British-occupied zone. It was a time when the Allies were 
sending Soviet refugees, traitors or otherwise, back home to 
the mercy of Stalin. His father was interrogated by a British 
intelligence major, who accused him, in faultless Ukranian, of 
fighting for Von Pannwitz. After a week of intermittent interviews, 
he succeeded in convincing the man that the accusation 
was unjust. 

They were moved on to Germany, where they were billeted 
in what had been an officers' club, below the Eagle's Nest at 
Berchtesgaden. They applied for emigration papers, to the 
United States and Canada: Argentina, they were told, was a 
better bet for people of doubtful status. At last, after a year of 
anxious waiting, there came news of jobs in Australia, and 
passages for the ones who signed. 

They took the chance, gladly. All they wanted was to get away 
from a murderous Europe — from the cold, mud, hunger and lost 
families — and come to a sunny country where everyone ate. 

They sailed from Trieste on a converted hospital ship. Every 
married couple was segregated on the voyage and could only 
meet in daylight on deck. After landing at Adelaide, they were 
interned in a camp of Nissen huts, where men in khaki barked 
orders in English. Sometimes, they thought they were back in 
Europe. 

I had noticed, earlier, something fierce in Arkady's obsession 
with Australian Railways. Now, he explained himself. 

The job assigned to Ivan Volchok was to work as a 
maintenance man on the Transcontinental line, in the middle of 
the Nullarbor Plain. There, between the stations of Xanthus 
and Kitchener, without wife or children, driven crazy by the sun 
and the diet of bully-beef and billy-tea, he laboured at the work 
of replacing sleepers. 

One day they brought him back to Adelaide on a stretcher. 
The doctors said, 'Heat exhaustion,' and the railway paid no 
proper compensation. Another doctor said, 'You've got a dicky 
heart.' He never worked again. 

Luckily, Arkady's mother was a capable and determined 
woman, who, starting with a street stall, built up a prosperous 
fruit and vegetable business. She bought a house in an eastern 
suburb. She read Russian novels to herself, Russian folktales to 
Arkasha and his brothers, and took them on Sundays to 
Orthodox Mass. 

Her husband had none of her resources. He had once been all 
muscle and rebellion. With age, he would shuffle round the 
shop, get in everyone's way, get drunk on his home-made 
hooch, and gloomily brood on the past. 

He would mumble incoherently about a pear tree in his 
mother's garden and of some amulet he had hidden in the fork. 
Trees, he said, were half-dead in Australia. In Russia there were 
real trees, which shed their leaves and came alive again. One 
evening, Arkady's brother Petro found him hacking down their 
Norfolk Island Pine. They knew, then, that things were 
seriously wrong. 

Through the Soviet Embassy in Canberra, they got permission 
for him and Petró to go back and visit his village, 
Gornyatskiye. He saw his sister, the old samovar, wheatfields, 
birches and a sluggish river. The pear tree had been cut down, 
long ago, for firewood. 

In th*e cemetery he cleared the burdock from his parents' 
grave and sat listening to the squeak of the rusty weathervane. 
After dark, they all sang, his nephews taking turns to play the 
family bandura. The day before their departure, the KGB took 
him to Rostov for questioning. They went over and over his 
dossier, and asked a lot of tricky questions, about the war. 

'Dad', said Arkady, 'was happier to see Vienna this time than 
the last.' 

This had happened seven years ago. Now, once again, he was 
yearning to go back to Russia. He now talked of nothing but the 
grave at Gornyatskiye. They knew he wanted to die there, and 
they didn't know how to arrange it. 

'Even as a Westerner', I said, 'I know how he must feel. 
Whenever I've been to Russia, I can't wait to get away. Then I 
can't wait to go back.' 

'You like Russia?' 

'The Russians are a wonderful people.' 

'I know that,' he answered sharply. 'Why?' 

'Hard to say,' I said. 'I like to think of Russia as a land of 
miracles. Just as you fear the worst, something wonderful 
always happens.' 

'Such as?' 

'Small things, mostly. Humble things. Humility in Russia is 
endless.' 

'I believe you,' he said. 'Come on. We'd better get going.' 

IO 

IT WAS A BRIGHT, moonlit night. Only in the moonlight was it 
safe to take a short cut through the Todd. The Aboriginals had 
the habit of sleeping off their liquor in the river-bed. In the pitch 
dark, you ran the risk of running into one of them, who might or 
might not be dangerously drunk. 

The trunks of the ghost-gums were shining white: several 
trees had been uprooted by another year's flood. Across the 
river we could see the Casino and the headlights of cars driving 
up to it. The sand was loose and grainy, and we went in over our 
ankles. On the far bank a tousled figure rose up from the bushes, 
mumbled 'Fuckers!' and sank back with a thud and crack of 
branches. 

'Harmlessly drunk!' said Arkady. 

He led the way past the Casino along a street of newly built 
houses. They had solar heaters clamped to their roofs and 
camper-trucks parked in the driveways. At the far end of the 
street, set aslant to the others, was an old, ramshackle pioneer 
house with a wide veranda and fly-screens. From the garden 
came the smell of frangipani and sizzling meat fat. 

A grey-bearded man called Bill, shirtless and pouring with 
sweat, was grilling steaks and sausages over a charcoal brazier. 

'Hello there, Ark!' he waved a fork in the air. 

'Hello, Bill,' said Arkady. 'This is Bruce.' 

'Pleased to meet you, Bruce,' Bill said, hastily. 'Help yourselves 
to food.' 

Bill's blonde wife, Janet, sat behind a trestle table serving 
salad. She had a broken arm in plaster. On the table were 
various bottles of wine, and a plastic tub full of ice and canned 
beers. 

The night bugs were whirling around a couple of hurricane 
lamps. 

The guests moved about the garden with their food on paper 
plates, or sat laughing on the ground in groups, or sat in serious 
conversation on camping chairs. They were nurses, teachers, 
lawyers, linguists, architects. All of them, I would guess, 
worked in one way or other with or for the Aboriginals. They 
were young and had wonderful legs. 

There was only one Aboriginal present: a lanky man in 
white shorts with a beard that fanned out below his navel. A 
half-blood girl was hanging on his arm. Her hair was tied 
tightly in a lilac headscarf. He allowed her to do all the talking. 

She spoke in a querulous voice: of how the Alice Town 
Council proposed to put a ban on public drinking. 'And where 
would our people drink,' she asked, 'if they're not allowed to 
drink in public?' 

I then saw the Gym Bore making a bee-line across the garden. 
He had changed into a Land Rights t-shirt and electric-green 
boxer shorts. He was, it had to be said, good-looking in a 
sourish way. His name was Kidder. The shrill, upward note on 
which he ended his sentences gave each of his statements, 
however dogmatic, a tentative and questionable bias. He would 
have made an excellent policeman. 

'As I was saying in the pub,' he said, 'the days of that kind of 
research are over.' 

'What kind of research?' 

'Aboriginals are sick and tired of being snooped at like they 
were animals in a zoo. They've called a halt.' 
'Who's called the halt?' 
'They have,' he said. 'And their community advisers.' 
'Of which you are one?' 
'I am,' he agreed, modestly. 
'Does that mean I can't talk to an Aboriginal without first 

asking your permission?' 
He jutted his chin, lowered his lids and looked sideways.'Do 
you wish', he asked, 'to be initiated?' 

He added that, if I did so wish, I'd be obliged to submit to 
circumcision if I hadn't been circumcised, then to subincision, 
which, as I doubtless knew, was to have your urethra peeled 
back like a banana skin and flayed with a stone knife. 

'Thank you,'I said.'I'll pass.' 

'In which case', said Kidder, 'you've no right poking your 
nose into business that doesn't concern you.' 

'Have.you been initiated?' 

'I... er ... I...' 

'I asked, have you been initiated?' 

He ran his ringers through his hair and resumed a more civil 
tone. 
'I think I should acquaint you', he said, 'with certain policy 
decisions.' 

'Tell me.' 

Kidder, expanding to his theme, said that sacred knowledge 
was the cultural property of the Aboriginal people. All such 
knowledge which had got into the hands of white men had been 
acquired either by fraud or by force. It was now going to be deprogrammed. 

'Knowledge is knowledge,' I said. 'It's not that easy to dispose 
of.' 

He did not agree. 

To 'de-programme' sacred knowledge, he said, meant examining 
archives for unpublished material on Aboriginals; you 
then returned the relevant pages to the rightful 'owners'. It 
meant transferring copyright from the author of a book to the 
people it described; returning photographs to the photographed 
(or their descendants); recording tapes to the recorded, and so 
forth. 

I heard him out, gasping with disbelief. 

'And who', I asked, 'will decide who these "owners" are?' 

'We have ways of researching that kind of information.' 

'Your ways or their ways?' 

He did not reply. Instead, changing the subject, he asked if I 
knew what a tjuringa was. 
T do,' I said. 
'What is a tjuringa?' 
'A sacred board,' I said. 'An Aboriginal's "holy of holies". 

Or, if you like, his "soul".' 

A tjuringa is usually an oval-ended plaque, carved from stone 
or mulga wood, and covered with patterns which represent the 
wanderings of its owner's Dreamtime Ancestor. In Aboriginal 
law, no uninitiated person was ever allowed to look on one. 

'Have you seen a tjuringa?' Kidder asked. 

'I have.' 

'Where?' 

'In the British Museum.' 

'Did you realise you were acting illegally?' 

'I never heard anything so silly.' 

Kidder folded his arms and squeezed his empty beer can; 
clu . . . unk! His chest was heaving up and down like a pouter 
pigeon's. 'People have been speared for less,' he said. 

Arkady, I was relieved to see, was coming across the lawn. 
He had a pile of coleslaw on his plate and a dribble of 
mayonnaise down his chin. 

'I knew you two should get together,' he grinned. 'Pair of 
talking heads!' 

Kidder drew his lips into a tight smile. He was an attractive 
commodity to women. An intense, dark-headed girl had been 
hovering round for some minutes. She was obviously dying to 
talk to him. She grabbed her chance. I grabbed mine: to get 
away and get some food. 

'You owe me an explanation,' I said to Arkady. 'Who is 
Kidder?' 

'Rich boy from Sydney.' 

'I mean what is he to the Land Rights movement?' 

'Nothing and nobody. He's got a plane, that's all. Flies 
about taking messages. Makes him feel important.' 
'Air lout,' I said. 
'He's a nice guy,' said Arkady. 'So they tell me.' 

I got some more salad and we went to join Marian. She was 
sitting on a rug and talking to a barrister. She had put on a 
dress more faded and tattered than the last, with a pattern of 
Japanese chrysanthemums. Rags suited her. Rags were her 
style. Anything other than rags might have made her look 
dowdy. 

She gave me either cheek to kiss and said she was glad I was 
coming. 

'Whereto?' 

'Middle Bore,' she said. 'You are coming, I hope?' 

'You too?' 

'Me too,' she glanced across at Arkady and crinkled up her 
eyes. 'I'm the Grand Duke's sidekick.' 

She told me how Aboriginal women have song cycles of 
their own and, therefore, different sites to be protected. Few 
people had realised this until recently: the reason being that 
the women were that much tighter with their secrets than the 
men. 

'Anyway, it's nice you're coming,' she smiled. 'It'll be fun.' 

She introduced me to the barrister, 'Bruce, this is Hughie.' 

'How do you do?' I said. 

He acknowledged my greeting with a slow inclination of the 
head. 

He had a pale, oval face and a clipped and pernickety way of 
enunciating his syllables; and with his freckles, his steelframed 
glasses, and the tuft of mousy hair sticking up on the 
back of his head, he really did look like the brightest boy in 
school. When the lamplight caught his features, you could tell 
he was lined and tired. 

He yawned. 'Couldn't we find a chair, my dear? I can't stand 
another minute and I do hate sitting on the ground. Don't 
you?' 

I found a couple of chairs and we sat down. Arkady and 
Marian, meanwhile, had gone off to discuss arrangements for 
the trip. 

The barrister had been in court all day, defending a black 
kid on a homicide charge. He would be all day in court 
tomorrow. He was a New Zealander. He had gone to public 
school in England and had been called to the Bar in London. 

We talked about the Lawson case, which had been tried in 
the Alice court. Lawson was a truckie, who, when apparently 
drunk, had been refused a drink by the lady proprietor of an 
Outback motel. He had gone out into the glare of noon, 
unhitched his trailer, and, twenty minutes later, had driven the 
truck through the bar at 35 m.p.h., killing five drinkers and 
wounding twenty. 

After the incident, Lawson went missing in the bush and, 
when found, said he could not recall a thing. 

'Do you believe that?' I asked. 

'Believe it? Of course, I believe it! Mr Lawson's a very nice 
and truthful person, and his company kept him dreadfully 
overworked. The trouble with his defence is that he wasn't 
drunk, he was drugged.' 

'What on?' 

'Amphetamines, poor thing! Hadn't slept a wink for five 
days. All these truckies feed on amphetamines! Pop them in 
their mouths like sweeties! One, two, three, four, five and 
Whooeee. . . ! they're away. No wonder he was a little 
blotto!' 

'Did that come out in court?' 

'The five days, yes, the amphetamines, no.' 

'Why ever not?' 

'Unmentionable! Amphetamines and the trucking business? 
[/tt-mentionable! Imagine if there had to be an inquiry. Amphetamines 
are this country's answer to distance. Without 
them, the place'd seize up.' 

'It's a weird country,' I said. 

'It is.' 

'Weirder than America.' 

'Much!' he agreed. 'America's youngl Young, innocent and 
cruel. But this country's old. Old rock! That's the difference! 
Old, weary and wise. Absorbent too! No matter what you 
pour on to it, it all gets sucked away.' 

He waved his thin white arm at the healthy, suntanned 
people on the lawn. 'Look at them!' he said. 'They think 
they're young. But they're not, you know. They're old. Born 
old!' 

'Not Arkady,' I objected. 'Arkady doesn't strike me as old.' 

'Ark's the exception,' he said. 'I think Ark must have 
dropped from Heaven. But the rest of them are old,' he 
continued. 'Have you ever noticed the eyelids of young people 
in this country? They're the eyelids of the old. You wake them 
up and they look like startled fauns - for a bit! Then they go 
back to being old.' 

'Perhaps it's the light?' I suggested. 'The glare of Australia 
that makes one long for the dark.' 

'Ark tells me you've got all sorts of interesting theories 
about this and that. I'd like to hear them one day, but tonight 
I'm tired.' 

'So am I.' 

'Not, of course, that I haven't a few pet theories of my own. 
I suppose that's why I'm here.' 

'I was wondering that.' 

'What?' 
'What you were doing here.' 
'I ask myself, my dear. Every time I brush my teeth, I ask the 
same question. But what would I do in London? Prissy little 
dinners? Pretty little flat? No. No. Wouldn't suit me at all.' 
'But why here?' 
T love it here,' he said thoughtfully. 'The abstraction, you 
understand me?' 
T think so.' 
'Suitable for marsupials, but never meant for man. The land, I 
mean. Makes people do the most peculiar things. Did you hear 
the story of the German girl and the bicycle?' 
'No.' 
'Very interesting case! Nice, healthy German girl. Hires a 
bike from a shop on Todd Street. Buys a lock from a shop on 
Court Street. Rides out of town along the Larapinta Drive and 
gets as far as Ormiston Gorge. She drags the bike through the 
Gorge, which, as you know if you've ever been there, is a 
superhuman feat. Then, in the middle of absolutely nowhere, 
she locks her leg to the frame, chucks away the key, and lies 
down to grill in the sun. The sun-bathing impulse gone haywire! 
Picked clean, she was! Picked!' 

'Nasty!' 

'No,' he shook his head. 'Reconciled! Dissolved! That's all 
part of my little theory about Australia. But I wont bore you 
with it now, because I'm really so dreadfully tired and I should 
be in bed.' 
'So should I,' I said and stood up. 
'Sit downV he said. 'Why must you Poms always be in such a 
hurry?' 

He sipped his wine. We sat in silence for a minute or two, and 
then he said, dreamily, 'Yes, it's a lovely place to be lost in. Being 
lost in Australia gives you a lovely feeling of security.' 

He jumped to his feet. 'And now,' he said, 'I simply must go! 
It's been very nice talking to you and I'm sure we shall talk 
again. Goodnight!' 

He walked away towards the garden gate, nodding his head 
and saying 'Goodnight!' to everyone he passed. 
I rejoined Arkady and Marian. 
'What did you make of Hughie?' he asked. 

'What an odd fish!' 
'Bloody good barrister,' he said. 'Has the court in stitches.' 
'I'll be off now,' I said. 'Don't move. I'll look in at the office 
tomorrow.' 
'You're not going yet,' he said. 'There's someone I want you 
to meet.' 
'Who's that?' 
'Dan Flynn.' He pointed towards the bearded Aboriginal. 
'The Father Flynn?' 
'Himself,' he said. 'You know the story?' 
'I do,' I said. 
'How?' 
'Heard it from an Irishman called Father Terence.' 
'Never heard of him.' 
'You wouldn't have,' I said. 'He's a hermit. He told me to 
look Flynn up.' 
Arkady threw back his head and laughed. 
'Everyone wants to look up Father Dan,' he said. 'Until they 
get the brush-off. If he likes you, you'll learn a lot. If he 
doesn't. . . you'll know it.' 
'Yes,' I said. 'I did hear he was difficult.' 

II 

SELDOM IN ITS missionary endeavours can the Catholic Church 
in Australia have suffered from so difficult a case as that of 
Father Flynn. 

He was a foundling, dumped by an unknown mother at the 
store of an Irishman at Fitzroy Crossing. At the age of six, he 
was sent to the Benedictine Mission at Cygnet Bay, where he 
refused to play with other black children, learned to serve at 
Mass, and had the habit of asking questions, about dogma, in a 
soft reverential brogue. One day, he reeled off pat the name of 
every Pope, from St Peter to Pius XII. The Fathers saw this as 
proof of his craving for Christ. 

They taught him Latin and encouraged him to take Holy 
Orders. He was taken in hand by the Mission's oldest inhabitant, 
an apparently harmless crank, Father Herzog, who 
had trained as an ethnographer and taught him the rudiments of 
comparative religion. 

Flynn was ordained in 1969. He went to Rome. He walked 
with fellow seminarians in the Alban Hills. He had an audience 
with the Holy Father, which lasted approximately one and a 
quarter minutes. On his return to Australia, the Order decided 
he should be the first Aboriginal to take charge of a mission on 
his own. 

The place they chose was Roe River, in the Kimberleys. And 
to equip himself for the task, Flynn was sent to learn from two 
old-timers, Fathers Subiros and Villaverde, at another Benedictine 
outpost: Boongaree. 

Father Subiros — I was later to meet him in the monastery of 
his retirement — was a sweet-tempered man: short, fat, Catalan 
and bookish. Father Villaverde was a leathery Extremenan, 
from Trujillo. Together for fifty years, they had suffered flood, 
famine, disease, mutiny, a Japanese bombardment, and many 
other onslaughts of the Devil. 

Boongaree was an hour's walk from the coast. Roe River, on 
the other hand, lay a hundred and fifty miles upcountry and could 
be cut off by the 'wets' for three months or more. Neither was a 
mission in the usual sense but cattle-stations, which the Order 
had picked up for a song in 1946 and were intended as refuge 
areas for tribes whose lands had been taken by the pastoralists. 
They had proved to be a very sound investment. 

Coming as he did from the birthplace of the Pizarros, Father 
Villaverde felt obliged to cast himself in the role of Conquistador. 
He said it was useless to try and impress the heathen with acts of 
love, when all they understood was force. He forbade them to 
hunt or even to garden. The only hope for their economic 
salvation was to foster an addiction to horseflesh. 

He would snatch small boys from their mothers and set them 
on a bucking saddle. Nothing gave him greater joy than to 
charge through the bush at the head of his troop of young 
daredevils. On Saturday afternoons, he would preside over a 
sports meeting, with sprinting, wrestling, spear-throwing and 
boomerang-throwing - and in each event he took part himself. 
A natural athlete — although in his seventies — he rejoiced at the 
chance of showing off his superior, European physique. The 
blacks, who knew how to humour him, would hold back their 
strength, allow him to win, crown him with a victor's wreath, 
and carry him shoulder-high to his quarters. 

He banned from the Mission all anthropologists, journalists 
and other snoopers. He prohibited 'traditional' ceremonies. 
Above all, with a kind of priestly envy, he resented his lads going 
off to look for wives. Once they got away, to Broome or Fitzroy 
Crossing, they picked up foul language, foul diseases and a taste 
for drink. So, having done everything to prevent them going, he 
did everything to prevent them coming back. 

The blacks believed he was deliberately trying to run down 
their numbers. 

I never went to either mission: by the time I got to Australia, 
they'd been closed for seven years. I only know of these goingson 
from Father Terence, who, when Flynn arrived at 
Boongaree, was living a mile or so from the compound, in a hut 
of leaves and branches. 

Father Villaverde hated Flynn on sight and put him through 
every kind of ordeal. He made him wade up to his neck in 
floodwater, castrate bullocks and scrub the latrines. He accused 
him of eyeing the Spanish nursing sisters at Mass, whereas it 
was they - poor village girls sent out in batches from a convent 
near Badajoz - who had, of course, been eyeing him. 

One day, as the Spaniards were conducting a Texan cattleking 
over the mission, the Texan's wife insisted on photographing 
a white-bearded elder, who sat cross-legged and 
unbuttoned in the dust. The old man was furious. He spat a neat 
gob of phlegm, which landed at the lady's feet. But she, rising to 
the occasion, apologised, ripped the film from her camera and, 
bending forward with the air of Lady Bountiful, asked, 'Is there 
anything I can send you from America?' 

'You can,' he snapped. 'Four Toyota Land Cruisers!' 

Father Villaverde was very shocked. To this authentic 
caballero, the internal combustion engine was an anathema. 
Someone must have been stirring up trouble. His suspicions fell 
on Father Flynn. 

A month or so later, he intercepted a letter from the 
Department of Aboriginal Affairs in Canberra, thanking the 
Boongaree Council for their request for a Land Cruiser: 
the matter would receive consideration. 

'And what', shrieked Father Villaverde, 'is the Boongaree 
Council?' 
Flynn folded his arms; waited for the tirade to blow over, and 
said, 'We are.' 

From that day on, there was open war. 

At the next Saturday's sports meeting, just as Father Villaverde 
had hurled his winning throw, Flynn, in a white 
soutane, strode out from behind the Chapel carrying a spear 
which had been rubbed with red ochre. He beckoned the 
spectators to clear a space and, with an apparently effortless 
flick, sent the weapon soaring into the air. 

The length of the throw was over twice that of the Spaniard who 
took to his bed in rage. 

I forget the name of the three tribes camped around the mission. 
Father Terence scribbled them on a scrap of paper, but I lost it. 
The point to remember is that Tribe A was the friend and ally of 

Tribe B, and both were blood-enemies of the men of Tribe C who, 
outflanked and deprived of their source of women, were in 
danger of dying out. 

The three camps lay equidistant from the Mission buildings: 
each tribe facing the direction of its former homeland. Fights 
would break out only after a period of taunts and accusations of 
sorcery. Yet, by tacit agreement, neither of the allies would gang 
up on their common enemy. All three recognised the Mission 
itself as neutral ground. 

Father Villaverde preferred to condone these periodic bouts 
of bloodletting: as long as the savages persisted in their 
ignorance of the Gospel, they were bound to go on fighting. 
Besides, the role of peacemaker suited his vanity. At the sound 
of screams, he would rush to the scene, stride through the 
clashing spears and, with the gesture of Christ calming the 
waters, say, 'Stop!' - and the warriors would shamble off home. 

The leading lawman of Tribe C had the unforgettable name 
of Cheekybugger Tabagee. An expert tracker in his youth, he 
had guided prospecting expeditions through the Kimberleys. 
He now hated every white man and, in thirty years, had not 
addressed one word to the Spaniards. 

Cheekybugger was built on a colossal scale: but he was old, 
arthritic and covered with the scabs of a skin disease. His legs 
were useless. He would sit in the half-shade of his humpy and let 
the dogs lick his sores. 

He knew he was dying and it enraged him. One by one, he had 
watched the young men go, or go to pieces. Soon there would be 
no one: either to sing the songs or to give blood for ceremonies. 

In Aboriginal belief, an unsung land is a dead land: since, if 
the songs are forgotten, the land itself will die. To allow that to 
happen was the worst of all possible crimes, and it was with this 
bitter thought that Cheekybugger decided to pass his songs to 
the enemy — thereby committing his people to perpetual peace, 
which, of course, was a far, far graver decision than conniving 
at perpetual war. 

He sent for Flynn and asked him to act as mediator. 

Flynn went from camp to camp, argued, exhorted and finally 
arrived at a formula. The snag was one of protocol. 

Cheekybugger had begun the negotiations: in Law, it was he 
who must deliver the songs in person. The question was how. 

He couldn't walk. He would not be carried. He scoffed at the 
offer of a horse. In the end it was Flynn who hit on the solution: 
by borrowing a wheelbarrow from the Malay cook who 
worked the kitchen-garden. 

The procession set off between two and three of a blistering 
blue afternoon, when the cockatoos were silent and the 
Spaniards snoring through their siesta. Cheekybugger went 
ahead in the wheelbarrow, pushed by his eldest son. Across his 
knee, wrapped in newspaper, lay his tjuringa, which he now 
proposed to lend to the enemy. The others followed in single file. 

At some point beyond the Chapel, two men - from Tribes A 
and B - stepped from the bushes and escorted the party to the 
place of 'business'. 

Flynn lagged behind, his eyes half-closed, with the air of a man 
in a trance. He brushed past Father Terence without a flicker of 
recognition. 

'I could see he was "off",' Father Terence told me. 'And I could 
see we were in for trouble. But it was all very moving. For the first 
time in my life I had a vision of peace on earth.' 

Around sunset, one of the nursing sisters took a short cut 
through the bush and heard the drone of voices and the tak . . . 
tak . . . of boomerangs being clacked together. She hurried to tell 
Father Villaverde. 

He rushed out to break up the meeting. Flynn walked out from 
behind a tree and warned him to stay away. 

After the fight, people said that Flynn had simply clamped his 
hands around his attacker's wrists and held them. This, however, 
did not prevent Father Villaverde from writing letter after letter 
to his superiors, claiming unprovoked assault and demanding 
that this acolyte of Satan be drummed from the body of the 
Church. 

Father Subiros advised him not to send them. Already, 
Aboriginal pressure groups were lobbying for an end to the 
missions. Flynn had not taken part in a heathenish rite: he had 
only acted as peacemaker. What if the press got wind of the 
affair? What if it came out that two elderly Spaniards had been 
stirring up tribal warfare? 

Father Villaverde gave in, against his better judgment; and in 
October 1976, two months before the 'wets', Flynn left to take 
charge of Roe River. The previous incumbent refused to meet 
him and left for Europe on sabbatical. The rains came - and 
there was silence. 

Sometime during Lent, the Catholic Bishop of the Kimberleys 
radioed Boongaree to confirm or deny a rumour that Flynn had 
'gone native' — to which Father Villaverde answered, 'He is 
native!' 

On the first day fit for flying, the Bishop flew the Benedictine 
to Roe River in his Cessna, where they inspected the damage 
'like two conservative politicians at the scene of a terrorist 
bomb'. 

The Chapel was in disarray. Buildings had been burnt for 
firewood. The stock-pens were empty and there were charred 
beef-bones everywhere. Father Villaverde said, 'Our work in 
Australia is at an end.' 

Flynn then overplayed his hand. He believed the Land Rights 
movement was advancing faster than it was. He counted on the 
assurance of certain left-wingers that missions all over the 
country would be handed over to the blacks. He refused to 
compromise. Father Villaverde trumped him. 

The affair had touched the Church at its most brittle point: 
the financial. It was not generally known that both Boongaree 
and Roe River had been financed with capital raised originally 
in Spain. A bank in Madrid held the title deeds as collateral. To 
forestall any attempt at confiscation, both missions were sold, 
secretly, to an American businessman and absorbed into the 
assets of a multinational corporation. 

The press campaigned for their return. The Americans 
threatened to close an unprofitable smelter, north of Perth, with 
a loss of 500 jobs. The unions intervened. The campaign 
subsided. The Aboriginals were dispersed, and Dan Flynn - as 
he styled himself - went to live with a girl in Broome. 

Her name was Goldie. In her ancestry were Malay, 
Koipanger, Japanese, Scot and Aboriginal. Her father had been 
a pearler and she was a dentist. Before moving into her 
apartment, Flynn wrote a letter, in faultless Latin, requesting 
Holy Father to release him from his vows. 

The couple moved to Alice Springs and were active in 
Aboriginal politics. 

12 

THE EX-BENEDICTINE was holding court to half a dozen people 
in the darker part of the garden. The moonlight shone on his 
brow-ridges: his face and beard were swallowed up in the 
darkness. His girlfriend sat at his feet. From time to time, she 
would stretch her lovely long neck across his thigh and he would 
reach out a finger and tickle her. 

He was, there was no denying it, difficult. When Arkady 
crouched beside the chair and explained what I wanted, I heard 
Flynn mutter, 'Christ, not another!' 

I had to wait a full five minutes before he deigned to turn his 
head in my direction. Then he asked in a flat, ironic voice, 'Is 
there anything I can do to help you?' 

'There is,' I said, nervously. 'I'm interested in the Songlines.' 

'Are you?' 

His presence was so daunting that whatever one said was sure 
to sound silly. I tried to interest him in various theories on the 
evolutionary origins of language. 
'There are linguists', I said, 'who believe the first language 
was in song.' 

He looked away and stroked his beard. 

I then tried another tack and described how Gipsies communicate 
over colossal distances by singing secret verses down the 
telephone. 

'Do they?' 

Before being initiated, I went on, a young Gipsy boy had to 
memorise the songs of his clan, the names of his kin, as well as 
hundreds and hundreds of international phone numbers. 

'Gipsies', I said, 'are probably the best phone-tappers in the 
world.' 

'I cannot see', said Flynn, 'what Gipsies have to do with our 
people.' 

'Because Gipsies', I said, 'also see themselves as hunters. The 
world is their hunting ground. Settlers are "sitting-game". The 
Gipsy word for "settler" is the same as the word for "meat".' 

Flynn turned to face me. 

'You know what our people call the white man?' he asked. 

'Meat,' I suggested. 

'And you know what they call a welfare cheque?' 

'Also meat.' 

'Bring a chair,' he said. 'I want to talk to you.' 

I fetched the chair I had been sitting on and sat down beside 
him. 

'Sorry I was a bit sharp,' he said. 'You should see the nutters I 
have to deal with. What are you drinking?' 
'I'll have a beer,' I said. 
'Four more beers,' Flynn called to a boy in an orange shirt. 
The boy went eagerly to get them. 
Flynn leaned forward and whispered something in Goldie's 

ear. She smiled and he talked. 

White men, he began, made the common mistake of assuming 
that, because the Aboriginals were wanderers, they could have , 
no system of land tenure. This was nonsense. Aboriginals, it was 
true, could not imagine territory as a block of land hemmed in 
by frontiers: but rather as an interlocking network of 'lines' or 
'ways through'. 

'All our words for "country"', he said, 'are the same as the 
words for "line".' 

For this there was one simple explanation. Most of Outback 
Australia was arid scrub or desert where rainfall was always 
patchy and where one year of plenty might be followed by seven 
years of lean. To move in such landscape was survival: to stay in 
the same place suicide. The definition of a man's 'own country' 
was 'the place in which I do not have to ask'. Yet to feel 'athome' in that country depended on being able to leave it. ' 
Everyone hoped to have at least four 'ways out', along which he 
could travel in a crisis. Every tribe - like it or not — had to 
cultivate relations with its neighbour. !| 

'So if A had fruits,' said Flynn, 'and B had duck and C had an j 
ochre quarry, there were formal rules for exchanging these 
commodities, and formal routes along which to trade.'

What the whites used to call the 'Walkabout' was, in practice, 
a kind of bush-telegraph-cum-stock-exchange, spreading mes
sages between peoples who never saw each other, who might be 
unaware of the other's existence. 

'This trade', he said, 'was not trade as you Europeans know 
it. Not the business of buying and selling for profit! Our 
people's trade was always symmetrical.' 

Aboriginals, in general, had the idea that all 'goods' were 
potentially malign and would work against their possessors 
unless they were forever in motion. The 'goods' did not have to 
be edible, or useful. People liked nothing better than to barter 
useless things — or things they could supply for themselves: 
feathers, sacred objects, belts of human hair. 

'I know,' I interrupted. 'Some people traded their umbilical 
cords.' 

'I see you've done your reading.' 

'Trade goods', he continued, should be seen rather as the 
bargaining counters of a gigantic game, in which the whole 
continent was the gaming board and all its inhabitants players. 
'Goods' were tokens of intent: to trade again, meet again, fix 
frontiers, intermarry, sing, dance, share resources and share 
ideas. 

A shell might travel from hand to hand, from the Timor Sea to 
the Bight, along 'roads' handed down since time began. These 
'roads' would follow the line of unfailing waterholes. The 
waterholes, in turn, were ceremonial centres where men of 
different tribes would gather. 

'For what you call corroborees?' 

'You call them corroborees,' he said. 'We don't.' 

'All right,' I nodded. 'Are you saying that a trade route always 
runs along a Songline?' 

'The trade route is the Songline,' said Flynn. 'Because songs, 
not things, are the principal medium of exchange. Trading in 
"things" is the secondary consequence of trading in song.' 

Before the whites came, he went on, no one in Australia was 
landless, since everyone inherited, as his or her private property, 
a stretch of the Ancestor's song and the stretch of country over 
which the song passed. A man's verses were his title deeds to 
territory. He could lend them to others. He could borrow other 
verses in return. The one thing he couldn't do was sell or get rid 
of them. 

Supposing the Elders of a Carpet Snake clan decided it was 
time to sing their song cycle from beginning to end? Messages 
would be sent out, up and down the track, summoning songowners 
to assemble at the Big Place. One after the other, each 
'owner' would then sing his stretch of the Ancestor's footprints. 
Always in the correct sequence! 

'To sing a verse out of order', Flynn said sombrely, 'was a 
crime. Usually meant the death penalty.' 
'I can see that,' I said. 'It'd be the musical equivalent of an 
earthquake.' 

'Worse,' he scowled. 'It would be to un-create the Creation.' 

Wherever there was a Big Place, he continued, the chances 
were that the other Dreamings would converge on it. So at one of 
your corroborees, you might have four different totemic clans, 
from any number of different tribes, all of whom would swap 
songs, dances, sons and daughters, and grant each other 'rights of 
way'. 

'When you've been around a bit longer,' he turned to me, 
'you'll hear the expression "acquiring ritual knowledge".' 
All this meant was that the man was extending his song-map. 
He was widening his options, exploring the world through song. 

'Imagine two Blackfellows', he said, 'meeting for the first time 
in an Alice pub. One will try one Dreaming. The other will try 
another. Then something's sure to click . . . ' 

'And that', Arkady piped up, 'will be the beginning of a 
beautiful drinking friendship.' 
Everyone laughed at this, except for Flynn, who went on 
talking. 

The next point, he said, was to understand that every song 
cycle went leap-frogging through language barriers, regardless 
of tribe or frontier. A Dreaming-track might start in the northwest, 
near Broome; thread its way through twenty languages or 
more; and go on to hit the sea near Adelaide. 

'And yet,' I said, 'it's still the same song.' 

'Our people', Flynn said, 'say they recognise a song by its 
"taste" or "smell" .. . by which, of course, they mean the 
"tune". The tune always stays the same, from the opening 
bars to the finale.' 

'Words may change,' Arkady interrupted again, 'but the 
melody lingers on.' 

'Does that mean', I asked, 'that a young man on Walkabout 
could sing his way across Australia providing he could hum 
the right tune?' 

'In theory, yes,' Flynn agreed. 

Around 1900, there was the case of an Arnhemlander who 
had walked across the continent in search of a wife. He 
married on the south coast and walked the bride back home 
with his new-found brother-in-law. The brother-in-law then 
married an Arnhemland girl, and marched her off down south. 

'Poor women,' I said. 
'Practical application of the Incest Taboo,' said Arkady. 'If 
you want fresh blood, you have to walk to get it.' 

'But in practice,' Flynn went on, 'the Elders would advise the 
young man not to travel more than two or three "stops" down 
the line.' 

'What do you mean by "stop"?' I asked. 

A 'stop', he said, was the 'handover point' where the song 
passed out of your ownership; where it was no longer yours to 
look after and no longer yours to lend. You'd sing to the end of 
your verses, and there lay the boundary. 

'I see,' I said. 'Like an international frontier. The road signs 
change language, but it's still the same road.' 

'More or less,' said Flynn. 'But that doesn't get the beauty of 
the system. Here there are no frontiers, only roads and 
"stops".' 

Suppose you took a tribal area like that of the Central 
Aranda? Suppose there were six hundred Dreamings weaving 
in and out of it? That would mean twelve hundred 'handover 
points' dotted around the perimeter. Each 'stop' had been sung 
into position by a Dreamtime Ancestor: its place on the songmap 
was thus unchangeable. But since each was the work of a 
different ancestor, there was no way of linking them sideways 
to form a modern political frontier. 

An Aboriginal family, he said, might have five full brothers, 
each of whom belonged to a different totemic clan, each with 
different allegiances inside and outside the tribe. To be sure, 
Aboriginals had fights and vendettas and blood-feuds — but 
always to redress some imbalance or sacrilege. The idea of 
invading their neighbour's land would never have entered their 
heads. 

'What this boils down to', I said, hesitantly, 'is something 
quite similar to birdsong. Birds also sing their territorial 
boundaries.' 

Arkady, who had been listening with his forehead on his 
kneecaps, looked up and shot me a glance, 'I was wondering 
when you'd rumble to that one.' 

Flynn then wound up the conversation by outlining the issue 
which had vexed so many anthropologists: the question of dual 
paternity. 

Early travellers in Australia reported that the Aboriginals 
made no connection between sex and conception: a proof, if 
proof were lacking, of their hopelessly 'primitive' mentality. 

This, of course, was nonsense. A man knew very well who his 
father was. Yet there was, in addition, a kind of parallel 
paternity which tied his soul to one particular point in the 
landscape. 

Each Ancestor, while singing his way across country, was 
believed to have left a trail of 'life-cells' or 'spirit-children' along 
the line of his footprints. 

'A kind of musical sperm,' said Arkady, making everyone 
laugh again: even, this time, Flynn. 

The song was supposed to lie over the ground in an unbroken 
chain of couplets: a couplet for each pair of the Ancestor's 
footfalls, each formed from the names he 'threw out' while 
walking. 

'A name to the right and a name to the left?' 

'Yes,' said Flynn. 

What you had to visualise was an already pregnant woman 
strolling about on her daily foraging round. Suddenly, she steps 
on a couplet, the 'spirit-child' jumps up — through her toe-nail, 
up her vagina, or into an open callus on her foot — and works 
its way into her womb, and impregnates the foetus with song. 

'The baby's first kick', he said, 'corresponds to the moment of 
"spirit-conception ".' 

The mother-to-be then marks the spot and rushes off to fetch 
the Elders. They then interpret the lie of the land and decide 
which Ancestor walked that way, and which stanzas will be the 
child's private property. They reserve him a 'conception site' — 
coinciding with the nearest landmark on the Songline. They 
earmark his tjuringa in the tjuringa storehouse . . . 

Flynn's voice was drowned by the noise of a jet coming in low 
overhead. 

'American,' said Marian, bitterly. 'They only fly in at night.' 

The Americans have a space-tracking station at Pine Gap in the 
MacDonnells. Flying into Alice, you see a great white globe and a 
cluster of other installations. No one in Australia, not even the 
Prime Minister, seems to know what really goes on there. No one 
knows what Pine Gap is for. 

'Christ, it's sinister,' Marian shuddered. 'I do wish they'd go.' 

The pilot applied his airbrakes and the transport slowed up 
along the runway. 
'They'll go,' Fiynn said. 'One day they'll have to go.' 
Our host and his wife had cleared up the leftovers and gone off 

to bed. I saw Kidder coming across the garden. 
'I'd better be off now,' he addressed the company. 'Got to go 
and do my flight plan.' 
He was flying to Ayer's Rock in the morning: on some business 
of the Ayer's Rock Land Claim. 

'Give it my love,' said Flynn, sarcastically. 

'See you around, mate,' Kidder turned to me. 

'See you,' I said. 

His shiny black Land Cruiser was parked in the driveway. He 
switched on the headlights and lit up all the people in the garden. 
He revved the engine loudly, and backed out into the street. 

'Big White Chief him gone!' Flynn said. 

'Silly fart,' said Marian. 

'Don't be unkind,' Arkady contradicted her. 'He's a good 
bloke, underneath.' 
'I never got that far.' 
Flynn, meanwhile, had leaned forward over his girl and was 

kissing her, covering her face and neck with the black wings of his 
beard. 
It was time to go. I thanked him. He shook my hand. I gave him 

Father Terence's regards. 

'How is he?' 

'Well,'I said. 

'Still in his little hut?' 

'Yes. But he says he's going to leave it.' 

'Father Terence', Flynn said, 'is a good man.' 

13 

BACK AT THE MOTEL, I was half-asleep when there was a knock 
on my door. 

'Bru?' 

'Yes.' 

'It's Bru.' 

'I know.' 

'Oh!' 

This other Bruce had sat next to me on the bus from 
Katherine. He was travelling down from Darwin, where he had 
just broken up with his wife. He was looking for a job on a 
road-gang. He missed his wife badly. He had a big pot belly and 
was not very bright. 

At Tennant Creek, he had said, 'You and me could be mates, 
Bru. I could teach you to drive a dozer.' Another time, with 
greater warmth, he said, 'You're not a whingeing Pom, Bru.' 
Now, long after midnight, he was outside my door calling, 
'Bru?' 

'What is it?' 

'Want to come out and get pissed?' 

'No.' 

'Oh!' 

'We could find some sheilas,' he said. 

'That a fact?' I said. 'This time of night?' 

'You're right, Bru.' 

'Go to bed,' I said. 

'Well, goo'night, Bru.' 

'Goodnight!' 

'Bru?' 

'What do you want now?' 

'Nothing,' he said and shuffled off, dragging his rubber 
thongs sblip . . . sblip along the corridor. 

There was a sodium light on the street outside my room, and a 
drunk was burbling on the sidewalk. I turned to the wall and 
tried to sleep, but I couldn't help thinking of Flynn and his girl. 

I remembered sitting with Father Terence on his empty beach 
and him saying, 'I hope she's soft.' 
Flynn, he said, was a man of tremendous passions, 'If she's 
soft, he'll "be all right. A hard one could lead him into trouble.' 

'What kind of trouble?' I asked. 

'Revolutionary trouble, or something like it. Flynn had to 
suffer a most un-Christian act and that alone could turn him. 
But not if the lady is soft. . . ' 

Father Terence had found his Thebaid on the shores of the 
Timor Sea. 

He lived in a hermitage cobbled from corrugated sheet and 
whitewashed, and set among clumps of pandanus on a dune of 
floury white sand. He had guyed the walls with cables to stop 
the sheets from flying in a cyclone. Above the roof there was a 
cross, its arms lashed together from two pieces of a broken oar. 
He had lived here for seven years, since the closing of 
Boongaree. 

I came up from the landward side. I could see the hut a good 
way off, through the trees, standing out on the dune against the 
sun. In the paddock below, a brahma bull was grazing. I passed 
an altar of coral slabs and a crucifix suspended from a branch. 

The dune had drifted higher than the treetops and, climbing 
up the scarp, I looked back inland across a level, wooded plain. 
To seaward, the dunes were hummocky and speckled with seagrass, 
and along the north side of the bay there was a thin line of 
mangrove. 

Father Terence was tapping at a typewriter. I called his name. 
He came out in shorts, and went in, and reappeared in a dirty 
white soutane. He wondered what had possessed me to walk all 
that way in the heat. 

'Here!' he said. 'Come and sit in the shade, and I'll boil up a 
billy for tea.' 

We sat on a bench in the shade, at the back of the hut. Lying 
on the ground were a pair of black rubber flippers, and a snorkel 
and mask. He broke some dead branches, lit them, and the 
flames flared up under the trivet. 



He was a short man, with reddish hair, what was left of it, 
and not too many flaky brown teeth. He wrapped the teeth in a 
hesitant smile. He would soon have to go to Broome, he said, 
to have the doctor freeze off his skin cancers. 

As a boy, he told me, he had lived in the Irish Embassy in 
Berlin, where his father, a patriot, worked in secret to destroy 
the British Empire: the temper of this man drove his son to a 
life of prayer. He had come to Australia in the 1960s: to join a 
new Cistercian house in Victoria. 

He typed every evening at this hour: letters mostly, to 
friends all over the world. He had a long correspondence with 
a Zen Buddhist monk in Japan. Then he would read, then light 
the lamp, and read on into the night. He had been reading 
Durkheim's Elementary Forms of Religious Life, which 
another friend had sent him from England. 

'Madness,' he gasped. 'Elementary forms indeed! How can 
religion have an elementary form? Was this fellow a Marxist 
or something?' 

He was working on a book of his own. It would be a 
'manual of poverty'. He hadn't yet decided on a title. 

Today, he said, more than ever before, men had to learn to 
live without things. Things filled men with fear: the more 
things they had, the more they had to fear. Things had a way 
of riveting themselves on to the soul and then telling the soul 
what to do. 

He poured the tea into two red enamel mugs. It was dark 
and scalding. We sat a minute or two until he suddenly broke 
the silence: 'Isn't it wonderful? To live in this wonderful 
twentieth century? For the first time in history, you don't need 
to own a thing.' 

He did, it was true, have a few possessions in his hut, but 
soon he was going to leave them. He was going away. He had 
grown too fond of his little hut, and it pained him. 

'There is a time for quiet,' he said, 'and a time for noise. 
Now I would welcome some noise.' 

For seven years, the Desert Fathers had been his spiritual 
guides: to be lost in the desert was to find one's way to God. 
But he was less concerned, now, for his own salvation than for 
the needs of people. He was going to work for derelicts in 
Sydney. 

'I believe something similar about the desert,' I said. Man was 
born in the desert, in Africa. By returning to the desert he 
rediscovers himself. 

Father Terence clicked his tongue and sighed, 'Dear, oh dear! 
I can see you're an evolutionist.' 

When I told him of my visit to Fathers Subiros and Villaverde, 
he sighed again and, in a very strong Irish accent, said, 'Those 
two! Quite a pair!' I asked about Flynn. He paused before 
making a measured reply. 

'Flynn has to be some kind of genius,' he said. 'He's got what 
you'd call a virgin intellect. He can learn anything. His grasp of 
theology is very fine, but I don't think he was ever a Believer. He 
could never take the leap into faith. Didn't have the imagination 
for it, and that did make him dangerous in a way. He got hold of 
one or two quite dangerous ideas.' 

'Such as?' 
'Syncretism,' said Father Terence. 'The visit to Rome was a 
mistake.' 

It was in Rome that Flynn began to hate being patronised by 
his white superiors and to resent the beliefs of his people being 
mocked. By the time he got to Boongaree, he was already 
thinking for himself. 

The Church, he used to say to Father Terence, was wrong to 
picture Aboriginals as being stranded in some dreadful limbo: 
their condition, rather, resembled that of Adam before the Fall. 
He liked to compare the 'Footprints of the Ancestor' with Our 
Lord's saying T am the Way.' 

'So what was I to do?' Father Terence asked me. 'Hold my 
tongue? Or tell him what I thought? No. I had to tell him that, to 
my mind, the mental world of the Aboriginals was so confused, 
so heartless and cruel. With what could one lessen their 
sufferings if not the Christian message? How else to stop the 
killing? The name of one of their places in the Kimberleys means 
"Kill them all!" and "Kill them all!" is one of those sacred sites 
they think so much of these days! No! No! No! These poor dark 
children have only two alternatives: the word of Christ, or the 
police!' 

No one would deny, he went on, that in their concept of the 
Dreamtime, the Aboriginals had felt the first glimmerings of the 
life eternal — which was to say that man was naturally religious. 

But to confuse their 'primitive' magic with the word of Christ, 
that was confusion indeed. 

The black men were not at fault. For thousands of years, 
they'd been cut off from the mainstream of humanity. How 
could they have felt the Great Awakening that swept the Old 
World in the centuries before Christ? What did they know of the 
Tao? Or the Buddha? The teachings of the Upanishads? Or the 
logos of Heraclitus? Nothing! How could they? But what they 
could do, even now, was to take the leap into faith. They could 
follow the steps of the Three Wise Men and adore the helpless 
Babe of Bethlehem. 

'And there', said Father Terence, 'I think I lost him. He never 
understood the story of the stable.' 

It was cooler now, and we shifted to the front of the hut. A 
line of thunderheads, like a procession of aerial icebergs, stood 
out to sea. The milky blue rollers flopped ashore, and there were 
flights of terns, skimming low over the bay, piercing the sound 
of the surf with thin metallic cries. There was no wind. 

Father Terence talked about computers and genetic 
engineering. I asked him if he ever longed for Ireland. 
'Never!' he raised both arms to the horizon. 'Here I could 
never lose it.' 
Nailed above the door of the hut was a plank of driftwood on 
which he had carved two lines in 'gaelic' lettering: 

Foxes have holes, birds of the air have nests 

But the Son of Man had no place to lay his head 

The Lord, he said, had spent forty days and forty nights in the 
wilderness, building neither house nor cell, but sheltering in the 
side of a well. 

'Come,' he beckoned me. 'Let me show you something.' 

He led the way over middens of pinkish shells: the spoilheaps 
of the tribe who once lived here. After about 200 yards, he 
stopped beside a cream-coloured rock with a fountain of clear 
water bubbling up under it. He lifted his soutane and splashed 
about in the water, like a little boy paddling. 

'Isn't water in the desert a lovely thing,' he called. 'I've called 
the name of this place Meribah.' 

On our way back to the hut, a wallaby poked its head round 

the pandanus, and hopped towards him. 

'My brother the wallaby,' he smiled. 

He went inside for a couple of crusts. The wallaby took them 

from his hand, and nuzzled its head against his thigh. He 

stroked it behind the ears. 

I said it was time for me to go. He offered to walk me along 

the beach. 

I took off my boots, hung them by the laces round my neck 

and the warm sand squeezed between my toes. Crabs scuttled 

sideways as we came up close, and there were flocks of waders 

which would flutter up and settle on ahead. 

What he'd miss most, he said, was the swimming. On a calm 

day he liked to snorkel for hours along the reef. The Customs' 

boat had spotted him once - and mistaken him for a floating 

corpse. 'And I was in birthday suit, I'm afraid.' 

The fish here, he said, were so tame you could float through a 

shoal and touch them. He knew all their colours and all their 

names: the rays, wrasses, wobbegongs, the baronessa butterfly, 

surgeon fish, scorpion fish, rabbit fish, angel fish. Each one was 

a 'character' with its own individual mannerisms: they re

minded him of the faces in a Dublin crowd. 

Out to sea, where the coral ended, there was a deep, dark cliff 

where, one day, a tiger shark swam out of the gloom and circled 

him. He saw the eyes, the jaws and the five gill-openings, but the 

brute sheered off and vanished. He had swum ashore and lain 

on the sand, shaking with delayed shock. Next morning, as if a 

load were lifted from him, he knew he no longer feared death. 

Again, he swam along the same stretch of reef, and again the 
' shark circled him and vanished. 

'Fear not!'he gripped my hand. 

The thunderheads were rolling closer. A warm wind began to 

blow off the waves. 

'Fear not!' he called again. 

I turned to wave at the two dim figures: a man in a flowing 

white robe and a wallaby with its tail in a question-mark. 

'Fear not!' He must have said the same words in my sleep, for 

when I woke in the morning they were the first ones that came to 

me. 

14 

IT WAS GREY and overcast when I went downstairs for breakfast. 
The sun was like a white blister, and there was a smell of 
burning. The morning papers were full of news of the bushfires 
north of Adelaide. The clouds, I then realised, were smoke. I put 
through a call to some friends, who, so far as I could judge, were 
either in or near the fire zone. 

'No, we're OK!' Nin's cheerful, crackly voice came down 
the line. 'The wind changed just in time. We did have a hairraising 
night, though.' 

They had watched the rim of the horizon on fire. The fire 
had been moving at 50 m.p.h., with nothing but state forest 
between them and it. The tops of the eucalyptus had been 
breaking off into fireballs, and flying in the gale-force winds. 

'Hair-raising, I'll say,' I said. 
'This is Australia,' she called back, and then the line went 
dead. 

Outside, it was so hot and muggy that I went back to my 
room, switched on the air-conditioner, and spent most of the 
day reading Strehlow's Songs of Central Australia. 

It was an awkward, discursive and unbelievably long book and 
Strehlow, by all accounts, was an awkward cuss himself. His 
father, Karl Strehlow, had been pastor in charge of the 
Lutheran Mission at Hermannsburg, to the west of Alice 
Springs. He was one of a handful of 'good Germans' who, by 
providing a secure land-base, did more than anyone to save the 
Central Australian Aboriginals from extinction by people of 
British stock. This did not make them popular. During the 
First World War, a press campaign broke out against this 
'Teuton spies'-nest' and the 'evil effects of Germanising the 
natives'. 

As a baby, Ted Strehlow had an Aranda wet-nurse and grew 
up speaking Aranda fluently. Later, as a university graduate, he 
returned to 'his people' and, for over thirty years, patiently 
recorded in notebooks, on tape and on film the songs and 
ceremonies of the passing order. His black friends asked him to 
do this so their songs should not die with them entirely. 

It was not surprising, given his background, that Strehlow 
became an embattled personality: an autodidact who craved 
both solitude and recognition, a German 'idealist' out of step 
with the ideals of Australia. 

Aranda Traditions, his earlier book, was years ahead of its 
time in its thesis that the intellect of the 'primitive' was in no 
way inferior to that of modern man. The message, though 
largely lost on Anglo-Saxon readers, was taken up by Claude 
Levi-Strauss, who incorporated Strehlow's insights into The 
Savage Mind. 

Then, in late middle age, Strehlow staked everything on a 
grand idea. 

He wanted to show how every aspect of Aboriginal song had 
its counterpart in Hebrew, Ancient Greek, Old Norse or Old 
English: the literatures we acknowledge as our own. Having 
grasped the connection of song and land, he wished to strike at 
the roots of song itself: to find in song a key to unravelling the 
mystery of the human condition. It was an impossible undertaking. 
He got no thanks for his trouble. 

When the Songs came out in 1971 , a carping review in the 
Times Literary Supplement suggested the author should have 
refrained from airing his 'grand poetic theory'. The review upset 
Strehlow terribly. More upsetting were the attacks of the 
'activists' who accused him of stealing the songs, with a view to 
publication, from innocent and unsuspecting Elders. 

Strehlow died at his desk in 1978, a broken man. His memory 
was served by a dismissive biography which, when I glanced 
at it in the Desert Bookstore, struck me as being beneath 
contempt. He was, I am convinced, a highly original thinker. 
His books are great and lonely books. 

Around five in the afternoon I dropped in on Arkady at the 
office. 

'I've got good news for you,' he said. 

A radio message had come in from Cullen, an Aboriginal 
out-station about 350 miles away on the West Australian 
border. Two clans were having a quarrel about mining royalties. 
They had called in Arkady to mediate. 

'Like to come?' he asked. 

'Sure.' 

'We can get through the railway business in a couple of days. 

Then we'll head out west across country.' 

He had already arranged my permit to visit an Aboriginal 
reservation. He had a long-standing date for the evening, so I 
called up Marian and asked if she felt like a meal. 

'Can't!' she called back, breathlessly. 

She'd been locking the front door when the phone rang. She 
was off that minute to Tennant Creek, to pick up the women for 
the survey. 

'See you tomorrow,' I said. 

'See you.' 

I had supper at the Colonel Sanders on Todd Street. Under the 
glaring neon, a man in a sleek blue suit was delivering a sermon 
to some teenage potential chicken-friers, as if frying Kentucky 
chicken were a kind of religious observance. 

I went back to my room and spent the evening with Strehlow 
and a bottle of 'burgundy'. 

Strehlow once compared the study of Aboriginal myths to 
entering a 'labyrinth of countless corridors and passages', all of 
which were mysteriously connected in ways of baffling complexity. 
Reading the Songs, I got the impression of a man who 
had entered this secret world by the back door; who had had the 
vision of a mental construction more marvellous and intricate 
than anything on earth, a construction to make Man's material 
achievements seem like so much dross — yet which somehow 
evaded description. 

What makes Aboriginal song so hard to appreciate is the 
endless accumulation of detail. Yet even a superficial reader can 
get a glimpse of a moral universe — as moral as the New 
Testament — in which the structures of kinship reach out to all 
living men, to all his fellow creatures, and to the rivers, the 
rocks and the trees. 

I read on. Strehlow's transliterations from the Aranda were 
enough to make anyone cross-eyed. When I could read no more, 

I shut the book. My eyelids felt like glasspaper. I finished the 
bottle of wine and went down to the bar for a brandy. 

A fat man and his wife were sitting by the pool. 

'A very good evening to you, sir!' he said. 

'Good evening,' I said. 

I ordered coffee and a double brandy at the bar, and took a 
second brandy back to the room. Reading Strehlow had made 
me want to write something. I was not drunk — yet — but had not 
been so nearly drunk in ages. I got out a yellow pad and began to 
write. 

IN THE BEGINNING . 

IN THE BEGINNING the Earth was an infinite and murky plain, 
separated from the sky and from the grey salt sea and smothered 
in a shadowy twilight. There were neither Sun nor Moon 
nor Stars. Yet, far away, lived the Sky-Dwellers: youthfully 
indifferent beings, human in form but with the feet of emus, 
their golden hair glittering like spiders' webs in the sunset, 
ageless and unageing, having existed for ever in their green, 
well-watered Paradise beyond the Western Clouds. 

On the surface of the Earth, the only features were certain 
hollows which would, one day, be waterholes. There were 
no animals and no plants, yet clustered round the waterholes 
there were pulpy masses of matter: lumps of primordial soup 

- soundless, sightless, unbreathing, unawake and unsleeping — 
each containing the essence of life, or the possibility of 
becoming human. 
Beneath the Earth's crust, however, the constellations glimmered, 
the Sun shone, the Moon waxed and waned, and all 
the forms of life lay sleeping: the scarlet of a desert-pea, the 
iridescence on a butterfly's wing, the twitching white whiskers 
of Old Man Kangaroo — dormant as seeds in the desert that 
must wait for a wandering shower. 

On the morning of the First Day, the Sun felt the urge to be 
born. (That evening the Stars and Moon would follow.) The Sun 
burst through the surface, flooding the land with golden light, 
warming the hollows under which each Ancestor lay sleeping. 

Unlike the Sky-dwellers, these Ancients had never been young. 
They were lame, exhausted greybeards with knotted limbs, and 
they had slept in isolation through the ages. 

So it was, on this First Morning, that each drowsing Ancestor 
felt the Sun's warmth pressing on his eyelids, and felt his body 
giving birth to children. The Snake Man felt snakes slithering 

out of his navel. The Cockatoo Man felt feathers. The Witchetty. 
Grub Man felt a wriggling, the Honey-ant a tickling, the 
Honeysuckle felt his leaves and flowers unfurling. The Bandicoot 
Man felt baby bandicoots seething from under his armpits. 
Every one of the 'living things', each at its own separate 
birthplace, reached up for the light of day. 

In the bottom of their hollows (now filling up with water), 
the Ancients shifted one leg, then another leg. They shook their 
shoulders and flexed their arms. They heaved their bodies upward 
through the mud. Their eyelids cracked open. They saw 
their children at play in the sunshine. 

The mud fell from their thighs, like placenta from a baby. 
Then, like the baby's first cry, each Ancestor opened his mouth 
and called out, 'i AM! ' 'I am — Snake . . . Cockatoo . . . Honeyant 
. . . Honeysuckle . . . And this first T am!', this primordial 
act of naming, was held, then and forever after, as the most 
secret and sacred couplet of the Ancestor's song. 

Each of the Ancients (now basking in the sunlight) put his 
left foot forward and called out a second name. He put his right 
foot forward and called out a third name. He named the waterhole, 
the reedbeds, the gum trees - calling to right and left, 
calling all things into being and weaving their names into verses. 

The Ancients sang their way all over the world. They sang 
the rivers and ranges, salt-pans and sand dunes. They hunted, 
ate, made love, danced, killed: wherever their tracks led they 
left a trail of music. 

They wrapped the whole world in a web of song; and at 
last, when the Earth was sung, they felt tired. Again in their 
limbs they felt the frozen immobility of Ages. Some sank into 
the ground where they stood. Some crawled into caves. Some 
crept away to their 'Eternal Homes', to the ancestral waterholes 
that bore them. 

All of them went 'back in'. 

15 

NEXT MORNING the cloud had cleared and, since the motel did 
not serve breakfast till eight, I went for a run to the Gap. The 
heat was already building up. The hills were brown and 
furrowed in the early light. 

On my way out I passed the fat man floating upward in the 
pool. There was a scar on his stomach, as if the skeleton of a fish 
had been impressed on it. 

'Good day to you, sir!' 

'Good day,' I said. 

Across the street, some Aboriginal families had parked 
themselves on the municipal lawn and were freshening up 
under the lawn-sprayer. They sat close enough to get sprayed 
and not too close to kill their cigarettes. Some snot-nosed 
children were tumbling about and were glistening wet all 
over. 

I said hello to a bearded man who said, 'Goodonya, mate.' I 
nodded to his woman who said, 'Go and suck eggs!' and 
lowered her eyelids and laughed. 

I passed the confused young bodies pumping iron in the 'Fun 
and Fitness Centre'; then turned right along the riverbank and 
stopped to read a notice by some ghost-gums: 

Registered Sacred Site for the Injalka (Caterpillar) Dreaming 
Entry by Vehicle Prohibited 
Penalty for damage $2,000 

There wasn't much to see, for a white man anyway: a broken 
barbed-wire fence, some crumbly stones lying this way and that, 
and a lot of broken bottles in the bristly grass. 

I ran on and reached the Gap, but was too hot to go on 
running so I walked back. The fat man was still floating in the 
pool and his fat wife was floating beside him. Her hair was in 
curlers and covered with a crinkly pink cap. 

I showered and packed my bag. I packed a pile of my old 
black notebooks. They were the notebooks for the 'nomad' 
book, which I had kept when I burned the manuscript. Some I 
hadn't looked at for at least ten years. They contained a 
mishmash of nearly indecipherable jottings, 'thoughts', quotations, 
brief encounters, travel notes, notes for stories .. . I had 
brought them to Australia because I planned to hole up 
somewhere in the desert, away from libraries and other men's 
work, and take a fresh look at what they contained. 

Outside my room, I was stopped by a fair, mop-headed boy in 
patched and faded jeans. He was red in the face and seemed very 
agitated. He asked if I'd seen an Aboriginal kid, 'A kid with a 
rasta hair-do?' 

'No,' I said. 

'Well, if you do see him, say Graham's waiting by the van.' 

'I will,' I said, and went in to breakfast. 

I had finished my second cup of disgusting coffee when the 
other Bruce came in and dumped his hard-hat on my table. I said 
I was leaving town. 

'Well, I won't see you, Bru,' he said morosely. 

'Maybe not, Bru,' I said. 

'Well, so long, Bru!' 

'So long!' I shook his hand, and he went up to get his 
porridge. 

Arkady drove up at nine in a brown Toyota Land Cruiser. On 
the roof-rack were four spare wheels and a row of jerry-cans for 
water. He wore a freshly laundered khaki shirt, from which the 
corporal's flashes had been removed. He smelled of soap. 

'You're smart,' I said. 

'It won't last,' he replied. 'Believe me, it will not last.' 

I chucked my bag on to the back seat. The rear of the cab was 
stacked with boxes of soft drinks and 'Eskis'. An 'Eski', for 
'Eskimo', is a polystyrene cool-pack without which a journey 
into the desert is unthinkable. 

We were half-way up Todd Street when Arkady braked, 
nipped into the Desert Bookstore and came out with the 
Penguin Classics edition of Ovid's Metamorphoses. 'Present for 
you,' he said. 'Reading matter for the trip.' 

We drove to the edge of town, past the 'Bed Shed' and 
'Territory Wrecking' and stopped at a Lebanese butcher to pick 
up some meat. The butcher's son looked up as we came in, and 
went on sharpening his blade. For the next ten minutes we filled 
the 'Eskis' to bursting with sausages and slabs of steak. 

'Tucker for my old men,' said Arkady. 

'Seems an awful lot.' 

'You just wait,' he said. 'They could eat a whole cow for 
supper.' 
We also bought some steak for an old 'bushie' by the name of 
Hanlon, who lived alone beyond the Glen Armond Pub. 

We drove on, past the sign to the Old Alice Telegraph Station, 
and then we were out in the bare, scrubby country of the Burt 
Plain. 

The road was a straight band of tarmac and, on either side, 
there were strips of red dirt with paddy-melon growing over 
them. The melons were the size of cricket balls. They had been 
brought to Australia by the Afghans as fodder for their camels. 
Sometimes Arkady would swerve on to the melon to miss a 
road-train coming south. The road-trains had three trailers. 
They did not slow down but came up, steadily out of the heatmirage, 
hogging the middle of the road. 

Every few miles, we passed the gates of a cattle-station, or a 
wind-pump with cattle clustered round it. There were a lot of 
dead beasts, legs in the air, ballooned up with gas and the crows 
on top of them. The rains were two months late. 

'Marginal country,' said Arkady. 

Almost all the best pastoral leases had been bought up by 
foreigners: Vesteys, Bunker Hunt and the like. No wonder 
Territorians felt cheated! 

'The country's against them,' he said. 'The politicians are 
against them. The multinationals are against them. The Abos 
are against them. Surely this country's only good for Abos?' 

He described how once, while they were tracing a Songline 
near Mount Wedge, the owner had driven up and, waving a 
shotgun, hollered, 'Get off my land! Get them coons off my 
land!' So Arkady, who had already written the man five letters 
without receiving a reply, explained the provisions of the Land 
Rights Act, whereby 'traditional owners' were allowed to visit 
their sites. 

This made the pastoralist hopping mad, 'There ain't no 
sacred sites on my land.' 

'Oh yes, there are,' said one of the Aboriginals present. 

'Oh no, they're not.' 

'You're standing on one, mate.' 

The road curved to cross a creek bed and, on the far side, 
Arkady pointed away to the east, to a switchback of pale 
jbrown hills. They stood up like cardboard scenery from the 
'plain. 
' 'You see the small hill, there?' he asked. 

'Yes.' 
There was a smaller, conical hill connected to the others by a 
low spur of rock. 

'That', he said, 'was where the railway people wanted to 
make a cutting. It would have saved at least two miles of 
track.' 

The hills lay on the northern edge of Aranda country: yet 
when Arkady sent word round the usual channels, no one 
wanted to claim them. He had been on the point of assuming 
there were no 'owners' when an Aranda mob showed up in his 
office . . . and said they were. He drove five of the men to the 
hills where they moped about miserably, their eyes bulging 
with fright. Again and again he asked, 'What are the songs of 
this place?', or, 'What's the Dreaming-story here?' They 
clamped their mouths and wouldn't say a word. 

'I couldn't think what was up,' he said. 'So I told them about 
die cutting, and that really set them off. They all began 
blubbering, "Blackfella die! Whitefella die! All people die! End 
of Australia! End of world! Finish!" 

'Well, obviously,' said Arkady, 'that had to be something 
big. So I asked the Elder, who's shaking from head to foot, 
"What have you got down there?" And he cups his hand 
around my ear and whispers, " MAGGOT POWER!"' 

The song that lay along the line of hills told of a Dreamtime 
Ancestor who failed to perform the correct ritual for controlling 
a bush-fly breeding cycle. Swarms of maggots overran the 
Burt Plain, stripping it bare of vegetation - as it is today. The 
Ancestor rounded up the maggots and crammed them back 
beneath the spur of rock where, ever since, they'd been breeding 
and breeding underground. The old men said that, if they 
cut into the hillside, there'd be a gigantic explosion. A cloud of 
flies would burst upwards and cover the whole earth and kill 
every man and animal with poison. 

'The Bomb!' I suggested. 
'The Bomb,' said Arkady, grimly. 'Some of my friends knew a 
lot about the Bomb. After it went off.' 

Before the British H-Bomb test at Maralinga, the Army 
posted 'Keep Out!' signs, in English, for Aboriginals to read. 
Not everyone saw them or could read English. 

'They went through it,' he said. 

'The Cloud?' 

'The Cloud.' 

'How many died?' 

'No one knows,' he said. 'It was all hushed up. You could try 
asking Jim Hanlon.' 

16 

AN HOUR OR SO later we passed the Glen Armond Pub, turned 
left off the tarmac, bumped along a dirt track, and stopped by a 
disused stockyard. 

Nearby, behind a screen of tamarisks, there was an old, 
unpainted tin bungalow, grey going over into rust, with a brick 
chimney standing up the middle. This was Hanlon's house. 

In the yard out front there were a stack of empty oil-drums 
and another stack of ex-Army surplus. At the back, under a 
squeaky wind-pump, there was a dead Chevrolet with silver
grass growing up through it. A faded poster, pasted to the front 
door, read 'Workers of the World Unite'. 

The door scraped open six inches. Hanlon was standing 
behind it. 

'Whatzamattawithya?' he crackled. 'Never seen a man naked 
before? Come on in, boys!' 

For a man in his seventies, Hanlon looked in good shape. He 
was skinny and taut-muscled, with a short flat head and a 
craning neck. His hair was crew-cropped and white, and he 
would pat down the bristles with his hand. He had a broken 
nose, wore steel-framed spectacles, and spoke in a loud nasal 
voice. 

We sat and he stood. He stared earnestly at his privates, 
scratched his crotch and bragged about a lady pharmacist he'd 
. tupped in Tennant Creek. 

'Not bad for seventy-three!' he looked down at himself. 

'Serviceable knackers! Reasonable set of teeth! What more 
would an old man need?' 

'Nothing,' said Arkady. 

'You're right,' Hanlon smirked. 

He tied a towel round his tummy and got out three bottles of 
beer. I noticed that his right hand was withered. 

It was baking hot inside the house. The heat pressed down 
from the roof and our shirts were soaked with sweat. The outer 
room was an L-shaped corridor, with an old enamel bath up one 
end. Then there was a kitchen, then a group of table and chairs. 

He showed us the clippings on the walls: a strike in 
Kalgoorlie, Lenin's skull, Uncle Joe's moustache, and pin-ups 
from Playboy. He had settled here, thirty years back, with a 
woman who had left him. He had sold off the land, and now 
lived on welfare. 

On the table there was a scarlet oilcloth, and a tabby cat 
licking off a plate. 
'Git, yer bastard!' He raised his fist and the cat flew off. 'So 
what are you boys up to?' 
'Going up to Kaititj country,' Arkady answered. 'With Alan 
Nakumurra's Mob.' 

'Survey, eh?' 

'Yes.' 

'Sacred sites, eh?' 

'Yes.' 

'Sacred bloody baloney! What those boys need is Organisation!' 

He flipped off the beer caps, then blew his nose into his hand 
and smeared the snot carefully on the underside of his chair. He 
caught me looking at him. He looked at me. 

He reminisced about his days at Kalgoorlie, as a paid-up 
Party member, before the Second World War. 
'Ask him!' he pointed at Arkady. 'Ask the boy for my curriculum 
vitae!' 

He pottered off into the inside room, where his bed was, and, 
after rummaging about among old newspapers, found a book 
with a dull red buckram binding. He sat down again, adjusted 
his spectacles and flattened his spine against the chair-back. 

'And now,' he announced, pretending to open the book at 
random, 'now we will read the Gospel according to Our Father 
Marx. Forgive an old man's blasphemies! For today — what 
the fuck is today? Thursday. . . thought so! the date is 
immaterial . . . page Z56 . . . And what do we have —?' 

What, then, constitutes the alienation of labour? First, the 
fact that labour is external to the worker, i.e. it does not 
belong to his essential being; that in his work he does not 
affirm himself but denies himself; does not feel content but 
unhappy; does not develop his physical and mental energy 
but mortifies his body and ruins his mind .. . 

'Nothing like a few lines of Marx before food,' he beamed. 
'For bracing the intellect and strengthening the digestion! Have 
you boys eaten?' 

'We have,' said Arkady. 

'Well, you're eating here with me.' 

'No, honestly, Jim. We can't.' 

'You bloody can.' 

'We'd be late.' 

'Late? What's late and what's early? An important philosophical 
question!' 
'We'd be late for a lady called Marian.' 
'Not a philosophical question!' he said. 'Who the hell's 

Marian?' 

'Old friend of mine,' Arkady said. 'Works for the Land 
Council. She's gone to fetch the Kaititj women. We're meeting 
her at Middle Bore.' 

'Marian! Maid Marian!' Hanlon smacked his lips. 'Descending 
to Middle Bore with her train of fair damsels. I tell you they 
can wait. Go and get the steaks, boy!' 

'Only if it's quick, Jim,' Arkady relented. 'We've got an hour, 
and that's it.' 

'Give me . . . give me . . . one hour . . . one hour . . . with 
you . . .' 

Hanlon still possessed the relics of a passable baritone. He 
looked at me. 'Don't you look at me like that!' he snapped. 'I've 
sung in choirs.' 

Arkady went out to fetch the steaks from the car. 

'So you're a writer, eh?' Hanlon said to me. 

'Of sorts.' 

'Ever do an honest day's work in your life?' 

His blue eyes were watering. His eyeballs were suspended in 
nets of red wires. 

'Try to,' I said. 

The withered hand shot forward. It was purplish and waxy. 
The little finger was off. He held the hand to my face, like a claw. 

'Know what this is?' he taunted. 

'A hand.' 

'A working man's hand.' 

'I've done farm-work,' I said. 'And timber-work.' 

'Timber? Where?' 

'Scotland.' 

'What kind of timber?' 

'Spruce . . . larch . . .' 

'Very convincing! What kind of saw?' 

'Power-saw.' 

'What make, you fool?' 

'Can't remember.' 

'Very unconvincing,' he said. 'Doesn't sound right to me.' 

Arkady pushed through the door with the steaks. There were 
drops of blood on the white plastic bag. Hanlon took the bag, 
opened it, and inhaled. 
'Ah, ha! That's better!' he grinned. 'Nice red meat for a 
change.' 
He got up, lit the gas-ring, poured fat from an old paint can 
and laid out three steaks in the skillet. 

'Here you!' he called to me. 'You come and talk to the cook.' 

The fat began to splutter and he took a spatula to stop the 
meat from sticking. 
'So you're writing a book?' 
'Trying to,' I said. 
'Why don't you write your book right here? You and me 
could have uplifting conversations.' 

'We could,' I said, hesitantly. 

'Ark!' Hanlon called. 'Watch these steaks a minute, will you, 
boy? I'm going to show the bookie his billet. Here! You come 
with me!' 

He dropped the towel to the floor, pulled on a pair of shorts 
and slipped his feet into thongs. I followed him into the sunlight. 
The wind had freshened and was kicking up clouds of red dust 
along the track. We went through the tamarisks to a creaking 
gum tree with a caravan underneath it. 

He opened the door. There was the smell of something dead. 
The windows were wrapped in spiders' webs. The bedding was 
stained and torn. Someone had spilled tomato sauce over the 
table-top, and the ants were swarming over it. 

'Nice little hidey-hole!' Hanlon said chirpily. 'Reasonable 
rent! And yer could oil the tree if the creaking gets you down.' 

'Very nice,' I said. 

'But not quite nice enough, eh?' 

'I didn't say that.' 

'But meant it,' he hissed. 'Of course, we could fumigate the 
place. Might fumigate you in the process!' 
He banged the door to, and stalked off back to the house. 
I hung about the yard for a while, and when I went in the 
steaks were done. Hanlon had fried six eggs and was ready to 
serve. 

'Serve His Lordship first!' he said to Arkady. 

He cut three hunks of bread and set a sauce bottle on the 
table. I waited for him to sit down. It was unbearably hot. I 
looked at the steak and the egg yolks. 
Hanlon looked at me for what seemed a full minute and said, 
'Get your fucking fangs into that steak!' 

We ate without speaking. 

Hanlon steadied his steak with his withered hand, and cut it 
into cubes with the good one. His knife had a serrated blade and 
a pair of curled-up prongs on the end of it. 
'Who the hell does he think he is?' he turned to Arkady. 'Who 
asked him to poke his upper-snotty-class nose in here?' 

'You did,' said Arkady. 

'Did I? Well, I made a mistake.' 

'I'm not upper class,' I said. 

'But a touch too classy for my little luncheon party! 
Luncheon! That's what they call it in Pongleterre! Luncheon 
with the Queen! What?' 

'Cut it out, Jim,' Arkady said. He was very embarrassed. 

'None of it meant personally,' said Hanlon. 

'That's something,' I said. 

'It is,' he agreed. 

'Tell him about Maralinga,' said Arkady, in an effort to turn 
the conversation. 'Tell him about the Cloud.' 
Hanlon raised his good hand and clicked his fingers like 
castanets. 

'The Cloud! Aye, aye, Sir! The Cloud! Her Majesty's Cloud. 
Sir Anthony-stuck-up-in-Eden's Cloud! Poor Sir Anthony! 
Wanted his Cloud so badly! So he could say to the Rooskie in 

Geneva, "Look, old boy, we also have the Cloud!" Forgetting, 
of course, that there are such things as variables in climate . . . ! 
Even in Australia! Forgetting the wind might be blowing in the 
wrong direction! So he calls up Bob Menzies and says, "Bob, I 
want my Cloud now! Today!" "But the wind . . ." says Sir Bob. 
"Don't you give me wind," says Sir Anthony. "I said nowV So 
they let of f the device—how I love that word " device "! - and the 
Cloud, instead of sailing out to sea to contaminate the fishes, 
sailed inland to contaminate us\ Where they lost it! Lost the 
bugger over Queensland! All so Sir Anthony could have a nice 
cosy Cloud talk with Comrade Nikita! "Yes, Comrade, it's true. 
We do, too, have the Cloud. Not that my men over there didn't 
lose it for a while! Vaporised a few Abos on the way . . ."' 

'That's enough,' said Arkady, firmly. 
Hanlon hung his head. 
'Aw, shit!' he said, and then prodded another steak cube and 
put it in his mouth. 
No on,e spoke until Hanlon burped and said, 'Beg pardon!' 
He pushed his plate away. 
'Can't eat the bugger,' he said. 
His face had turned putty colour. His hand was shaky. 
'Anything the matter?' asked Arkady. 
'I got a crook gut, Ark.' 
'You should go to a doctor.' 
'I been to the doctor. They want to cut me up, Ark.' 
'I'm sorry,' I said. 
'I won't let them cut me. That's right, isn't it?' 
'No,' said Arkady. 'Maybe you should go.' 
'Well, maybe I will,' he sniffed miserably. 
At the end of another five minutes Arkady got up and laid his 
arm protectively around the old man's shoulders. 
'Jim,' he said in a soft voice, 'I'm sorry, I'm afraid we've got to 
go. Can we take you anywhere?' 
'No,' he said. 'I'll stay.' 
We made a move to go. 
'Stay a bit longer,' Hanlon said. 
'No, really, we have to go.' 
'I wish you boys'd stay a bit longer. We could have a good 
time.' 
'We'll come again,' I said. 

'Will you?' Hanlon held his breath. 'When?' 
'Couple of days,' said Arkady. 'We'll be done by then. Then 
we're heading out to Cullen.' 
'Sorry I flew at you,' he said to me. His lip was quivering. 
'Always fly at Poms!' 

'No worries,' I said. 

It was hotter than ever outside, and the wind was dying. In the 
front paddock a wedge-tailed eagle was skimming down the line 
of the fence-posts. It was a lovely, gleaming, bronze-feathered 
bird and it sheered away when it saw us. 

I tried to shake Hanlon's hand. He was holding it over his 
abdomen. We got into the Land Cruiser. 

'You might have said thank you for the steaks,' he called out 
after us. 

He was trying to resume his abrasive manner, but he looked 
scared. His cheeks were wet with tears. He turned his back. He 
could not bear to watch us going. 

17 

AT THE GATE TO Skull Creek Camp, there was a signboard 
announcing a fine of $2,000 for anyone bringing liquor on to an 
Aboriginal settlement, over which someone had scrawled in 
white chalk, 'Bullshit!' We had come here to pick up a Kaititj 
Elder called Timmy. He was a relative of Alan Nakumurra, on 
his mother's side, and knew the Dreamings around Middle Bore 
Station. 

I unchained the gate and we drove towards a scatter of 
shiny tin roofs, half-seen through the bleached grass. On the 
edge of the settlement, some boys were bouncing on a 
trampoline and, nearby, there was a big brown windowless 
metal box which, Arkady said, was the clinic. 

'Someone then called it the "Death Machine",' he said. 'Now 
no one'll ever go near it.' ' 

We parked under a pair of ghost-gums, alongside a small 
whitewashed house. Songbirds were chattering in the branches. 
Two full-bosomed women, one in a loose green smock, lay 
asleep on the porch. 

'Mavis,' Arkady called. 

Neither of the snoring fat creatures stirred. 

Beyond the gums, set down in a circle around an expanse of 
red dirt, were about twenty humpies: half-cylinders of corrugated 
sheet, open-ended like pig-shelters, with people lying or 
squatting in the shade. 

Paper cartons and bits of sheet plastic were flying in the wind, 
and over the whole settlement there was a glint of glass. Glossy 
black crows hopped here and there, blinking their jaundicecoloured 
eyes and pecking at old bully-beef cans, until driven 
off by the dogs. 

A small boy, recognising Arkady, shouted, 'Ark! Ark!' and, 
within seconds, we were surrounded by a mob of naked 
children clamouring, 'Ark! Ark! Ark!' Their fair hair looked 
like stubble in a field of black soil. Flies were feeding from the 
corners of their eyes. 

Arkady held two in his arms. A third rode piggyback, and the 
others pawed at his legs. He patted their heads, squeezed their 
outstretched palms; then, opening the back of the Land Cruiser, 
he began distributing drinks and lollies. 

One of the fat women sat up, pushed aside her tangle of hair, 
yawned, rubbed her eyes and said, 'S'that you, Ark?' 

'Hello, Mavis!' he said. 'How's you today?' 

'M'right,' she yawned again, and shook herself. 

'Where's Timmy?' 

"Sleep.' 

i want to take him out bush.' 

'Today?' 

'Now, Mavis. Now!' 

Mavis heaved herself to her feet and went off lumpily to wake 
her husband. She needn't have bothered. Timmy had heard the 
kerfuffle outside and was standing in the doorway. 

He was a pale, skinny, impish-looking old man with a wispy 
beard and one eye clouded with trachoma. He wore a brown felt 
hat at an angle and a red handkerchief knotted at his neck. He 
was so skinny he kept having to hitch up his pants. He waggled a 
finger at Arkady, and sniggered. 

Arkady shed the children and fetched from the car a photo 
album, with snapshots from an earlier expedition. He then sat 
on the steps with Timmy and Timmy turned the pages with the 
furious concentration of a child absorbed in a story-book. 

I sat behind them, looking on. An insistent white bitch with 
mastitis kept ramming her snout up my crotch. 
Arkady hugged the old man and said, 'Are you coming with 
us today, then?' 

'Got the tucker?' asked Timmy. 

'Got the tucker.' 

'Good.' 

Mavis sat slumped alongside us. She had pulled her hair over 
her face again and all you saw of her was a cracked and pouting 
lower lip. 

Arkady leaned round and said, 'Are you coming too, Mavis? 
We've got Topsy and Gladys from Curtis Springs.' 

'Nah!' she growled, bitterly. 'I never go no place now. Sit 
down here all the time.' 

'No holiday or nothing?' 

She sniffed. 'Sometimes we go up Tennant Creek. I got 
people there. My mother come from that country. She come 
from the big bore by the creek. You know that place?' 

'I think so,' Arkady said, uncertainly. 

'Billy Boy Mob's country,' said Mavis, rousing herself with 
exhausted dignity, as though defining her right to exist. 'Right 
up to McCluhan Station.' 

'And you won't come with us to Middle Bore?' 

'Can't,' she snorted. 

'What's stopping you?' 

'No thongs.' She stretched out her foot and invited Arkady 
to inspect her split and calloused sole. 'Can't go no place 
without thongs. Got to get myself some thongs.' 

'Have mine!' I volunteered. 'I've got a spare.' 

I went to the car, undid my rucksack and pulled out my one 
and only pair of green rubber thongs. Mavis grabbed them 
from my hand as if it were J who had stolen them from her. 
She put them on, tossed her head, and shuffled off to fetch 
Timmy's billy and blanket. 'Goodonya, Sir Walter!' said 
Arkady, and grinned. 

Timmy meanwhile was sucking at his carton of apple juice. 
He put it down, re-aligned his hat, sucked again and then said, 
thoughtfully, 'What about Big Tom?' 

'Is he here?' 

'Sure he's here.' 

'Would he come?' 

'Sure he'd come.' 

We walked towards a shack with a lean-to trellis of 
paddy-melons under which Big Tom was sleeping. He was 
shirtless. His heaving paunch was covered with whorls of hair. 
His dog began to yap and he woke. 

'Tom,' said Arkady, 'we're going up to Middle Bore. You 
want to come?' 

'Sure I'll come,' he smiled. 

He crawled out, reached for a brown shirt and hat, and 
pronounced himself ready to leave. His wife, Ruby, a spindly 
woman with a dizzy smile, then crawled out from her side of 
the shelter, covered her head with a green spotted scarf and said 
she, too, was ready. 
I never saw two married people pack up and get going so 
quick. 
We were a party of six now, and the smell inside the Land 
Cruiser was rich and strange. 

On the way out, we passed a long-limbed young man with 
fair hair in rat-tails and a reddish beard. He was lying full-length 
on the dirt. He had on an orange t-shirt, washed-out red jeans, 
and around his neck there was a Rajneesh rosary. Four or five 
black women squatted round him. They appeared to be 
massaging his legs. 

Arkady tooted the horn and waved. The man nearly managed 
a nod. 

'Whoever's that?' I asked. 

'That's Craig,' he said. 'He's married to one of the women.' 

AT THE BURNT FLAT HOTEL, where we stopped for a tank of 
gasoline, a police patrolman was taking affidavits about a man 
found dead on the road. 

The victim, he told us, had been white, in his twenties and a 
derelict. Motorists had been sighting him on and off along the 
highway, over the past three days. 'And he's a right mess now. We 
had to scrape him off the bitumen with a shovel. Truckie mistook 
him for a dead roo.' 

The 'accident' had happened at five in the morning but the 
body - what was left of it by the road-train — had been cold for 
about six hours. 

'Looks like somebody dumped him,' said the policeman. 

He was being most of ficiously polite. His adam's apple worked 
up and down the V of his khaki shirt. It was his duty, we would 
understand that, to ask a few questions. Run over a coon in Alice 
Springs and no one'd give it a thought. But a white man . . . ! 

'So where were you boys at eleven last night?' 

'The Alice,' said Arkady in a flat voice. 

'Thank you very much,' the officer touched his hat brim. 'No 
need to trouble you further.' 

All this he said, looking into the cab, without once removing 
his stare from our passengers. The passengers, for their part, 
pretended he did not exist and stared with set faces at the 
plain. 

The policeman walked towards his air-conditioned car. 
Arkady rang the bell for service. He rang again. He rang a third 
time. Nobody came. 

'Looks like we're in for a wait,' he shrugged. 

'It does,' I agreed. 

It was three in the afternoon and the buildings were swimming 
in the heat. The hotel was painted a toffee-brown and, on the 
corrugated roof, in bold but peeling white letters, were the 
words BURNT FLAT. Under the veranda there was an aviary of 
budgerigars and rosellas. The bunkrooms were boarded up, 
and a sign read, 'This business is for sale'. 

The name of the proprietor was Bruce. 
'Profits went down', said Arkady, 'when they took away his 
off-licence.' 
Bruce had made a mint of money, until the change in 
licensing laws, selling fortified wine to Aboriginals. 

We waited. 

An elderly couple drove up in a camper, and when the 
husband pressed the service bell, the bar-room door opened 
and a man in shorts came out with a bull-terrier panting at its 
leash. 

Bruce had quarter-to-three feet, red hair, flabby buttocks 
and oval jowls. His arms were tattooed with mermaids. He 
tied up the dog, which yelped at our passengers. He eyeballed 
Arkady and went to serve the couple with the camper. 

After the man had paid, Arkady asked Bruce very civilly, 
'Could we get a tank, please?' 

Bruce untied the dog and waddled off the way he'd come. 

'Pig,' said Arkady. 

We waited. 

The patrolman was watching from his car. 

'They have to serve us eventually,' Arkady said. 'By law.' 

Ten minutes later, the door re-opened and a woman in a 
blue skirt came down the steps. She had short hair, prematurely 
grey. She had been making pie and the pastry still 
clung to her fingernails. 

'Don't mind Bruce,' she sighed. 'He's mad today.' 
'Unusual?' Arkady smiled, and she hunched her shoulders 
and exhaled a long breath. 
'Go on in,' he said to me, 'if you'd like to see some local 
colour.' 

'Go on,' the woman urged, as she hung up the nozzle. 

'Have we time?' 

'We can make time,' he said. 'For your education.' 

The woman tightened her forelip and let out an awkward 
laugh. 

'Why don't I buy them a drink?' I suggested. 

'Do that,' said Arkady. 'I'll have a beer.' 

I poked my head through the window and asked what they'd 
have. Mavis said orange but changed her mind to orange and 
mango. Ruby said apple. Big Tom said grapefruit and Timmy 
said Coke. 

'And a Violet Crumble,' he added. Violet Crumble is a 
chocolate-covered candy bar. 

Arkady paid the woman and I followed her into the bar. 

'And as you come out,' he called after me, 'look to the right of 
the light switch.' 

Inside, some men from a road-gang were playing darts, and a 
station-hand, togged up in Western gear, was feeding coins into 
a juke-box. There were a lot of Polaroid pictures pinned to the 
walls: of fat people naked and a lot of long balloons. A notice 
read, 'Credit is like Sex. Some get it. Some don't.' A 'medieval' 
scroll had the caricature of a muscle-man and some 'Olde 
Englishe' lettering: 

Yea, though I walk through 
The Valley of the Shadow of Death 
I will fear no Evil 
For I, Bruce, am 
The Meanest son of a Bitch in the Valley. 

Alongside the bottles of Southern Comfort, there was an old 
bottle topped with yellow liquid and labelled, 'Authentic N.T. 
Gin Piss.' 

I waited. 
I heard Bruce tell one of the drinkers he'd bought a place in 
Queensland where you could 'still call a Boong a Boong'. 
A telegraph engineer came in dripping with sweat, and 
ordered a couple of beers. 

'Hear you had a hit-and-run job up the road?' he said. 

'Yeah!' Bruce displayed his teeth. 'More meat!' 

'What'z'at?' 

'I said more edible meat.' 

'Edible?' 

'White man.' Bruce hung out his tongue and guffawed. The 
engineer, I was glad to see, frowned and said nothing. 
The engineer's mate then pushed through the door and sat on 
a bar-stool. He was a lanky young Aboriginal half-blood, with a 
cheery, self-deprecating smile. 

'No coons in here,' Bruce raised his voice above the noise of 
the dart-players. 'Did you hear me? I said, "No coons in here!"' 
'I ain't a coon,' the half-blood answered. 'I just got skin 
problems.' 

Bruce laughed. The road-gang laughed, and the half-blood 
clenched his teeth and went on smiling. I watched his fingers 
tighten around his beer can. 

Bruce then said to me in a voice of forced politeness, 'You're a 
long ways from home. What'll it be?' 

I gave the order. 

'And a Violet Crumble,' I said. 

'And a Violet Crumble for the English gent!' 

I said nothing, and paid. 

On my way out I looked to the right of the light switch and 
saw a bullet-hole in the wallpaper. Around it hung a gilded 
frame with a little brass plaque - the kind of plaque you see 
nailed below antlers or a stuffed fish — reading 'Mike - 1982'. 

I handed round the drinks and they took them without a nod. 

'So who was Mike?' I asked as we drove away. 

'Is Mike,' Arkady said. 'He was Bruce's barman.' 

It had been a similar baking summer afternoon, and four 
Pintupi boys, driving back from the Balgo Mission, had stopped 
to get gas and a drink. They were very tired and excitable and 
when the eldest boy saw the 'Gin Piss' bottle, he said something 
quite abusive. Mike refused to serve them. The boy aimed a beer 
glass at the bottle, and missed. Mike took Bruce's .22 rifle — 
which Bruce kept handy under the counter — and fired above 
their heads. 

'That, at any rate,' said Arkady, 'is what Mike said at the 
trial.' 

The first shot hit the kid through the base of the skull. The 
second shot hit the wall to the right of the light switch. A third, 
for good measure, went into the ceiling. 

'Naturally,' Arkady continued in the same unemotional tone, 
'the neighbours wished to contribute to the unfortunate 
barman's legal fees. They organised a gala, with a topless show 
from Adelaide.' 

'And Mike got off?'  

'Self-defence.' 

'What about the witnesses?' 

'Aboriginal witnesses', he said, 'are not always easy to 
handle. They refuse, for example, to hear the dead man called 
by name.' 

'You mean they wouldn't testify?' 

'It makes the case for the prosecution difficult.' 

19 

W E FORKED RIGHT at the sign for Middle Bore and headed east 
along a dusty road that ran parallel to a rocky escarpment. The 
road rose and fell through a thicket of grey-leaved hushes, and 
there were pale hawks perching on the fence-posts. Arkady kept 
swerving to avoid the deeper ruts. 

Not far to the right, we passed an outcrop of weathered 
sandstone, with free-standing pinnacles about twenty feet high. 
I knew it had to be a Dreaming site. I nudged Big Tom in the 
ribs. 

'Who's that one?'I asked. 

'Him a small one,' he cricked his index finger to imitate a 
wriggling grub. 
'Witchetty?' 
He shook his head strenuously and, with the gesture of 
feeding a grub into his mouth, said, 'Smaller one.' 

'Caterpillar?' 

'Yeah!' he beamed, and nudged me back. 

The road ran on towards a white house in a clump of trees 
with a spread of buildings beyond it. This was Middle Bore 
Station. There were chestnut horses grazing in a field of bonewhite 
grass. 

We veered left along a smaller track, crossed a watercourse 
and stopped at the gate of my second Aboriginal camp. The 
place had a less woebegone look than Skull Creek. There were 
fewer broken bottles, fewer festering dogs, and the children 
looked far healthier. 

Although it was late in the afternoon, most of the people were 
still asleep. A woman sat sorting bush-tucker under a tree and, 
when Arkady greeted her, she looked down and stared at her 
toes. 

We picked our way past the humpies, zigzagging through 
clumps of spinifex towards the wheel-less body of a Volkswagen 
van. There was a green tarpaulin stretched over the 
door, and a length of plastic hose dribbled into a patch of watermelon. 
Chained to the van was the usual sharp-muzzled hound. 

'Alan?' Arkady raised his voice above the yapping. 

No reply. 

'Alan, are you there? . . . Christ,' he said under his breath, 
'let's hope he's not gone off again.' 

We waited a while longer and a long black hand appeared 
around the edge of the tarpaulin. This was followed, after an 
interval, by a wiry, silver-bearded man wearing a pale grey 
stetson, dirty white pants and a purple shirt printed with 
guitars. He was barefoot. He stepped into the sunlight, looked 
clean through Arkady, and majestically lowered his head. 

The dog continued to bark, and he walloped it. 

Arkady talked to him in Walbiri. The old man listened to 
what he had to say, lowered his head a second time, and retired 
back behind the tarpaulin. 

'Reminds me of Haile Selassie,' I said as we walked away. 

'But grander.' 

'Much grander,' I agreed. 'He will come, won't he?' 

'I think so.' 

'Can he speak any English?' 

'Can but won't. English isn't his favourite language.' 

The Kaititj, Arkady told me, had had the misfortune to live 
along the route of the Overland Telegraph Line and so came 
early into contact with the white man. They also learned to 
make knives and spear-points from the glass-conductors, and, 
to put a stop to this practice, it was thought necessary to 
teach them a lesson. The Kaititj took revenge on their 
murderers. 

Earlier in the afternoon we had passed on the roadside the 
grave of the telegraph operator who, in 1874, dying of a spearthrust, 
succeeded in tapping out a farewell message to his wife in 
Adelaide. The police reprisals dragged on until the 19ZOS. 

Alan, as a young man, had seen his father and brothers 
gunned down. 

'And you say he's the last one left?' 

'Of his clan,' he said. 'In this stretch of country.' 

We were sitting back to back against the trunk of a gum tree, 
watching the camp come alive. Mavis and Ruby had gone 
visiting their women friends. Big Tom had dozed off, and 
Timmy sat cross-legged, smiling. The ground was parched and 
cracked, and a solid, undeviating stream of ants was passing 
within inches of my boots. 

'Where the hell is Marian?' Arkady said, abruptly. 'Should 
have been here hours ago. Anyway, let's get some tea.' 

I dragged some brushwood from the thicket and lit a fire 
while Arkady unpacked the tea things. He passed a ham roll to 
Timmy, who gobbled it up, asked for another and, with the air 
of a man accustomed to being waited on by servants, handed me 
his billy to fill. 

The water was almost boiling when, all of a sudden, there was 
a tremendous hullabaloo in the camp. Women shrieked, dogs 
and children scuttled for cover, and we saw, hurtling towards 
us, a column of purplish-brown dust. 

The willy-willy roared and crackled as it approached; sucked 
up leaves, branches, plastic, paper and scraps of metal sheet, 
spiralling them into the sky and then sweeping across the 
camp-ground and on towards the road. 

A moment or two of panic - and everything was back to 
normal. 

After a while we were joined by a middle-aged man in a skyblue 
shirt. He was hatless. The stiff grey bristles on his head 
were the length of the bristles on his chin. His frank and smiling 
face reminded me of my father's. He squatted on his hams and 
shovelled spoonsful of sugar into his mug. Arkady talked. The 
man waited for him to finish and answered in a low whisper, 
doodling diagrams in the sand with his finger. 

Then he walked away, in the direction of Alan's living van. 

'Who was he?' I asked. 

'The old man's nephew,' he said. 'And also his "ritual 
manager".' 

'What did he want?' 

'To check us out.' 

'Did we pass?' 

'I think we can expect a visit.' 

'When?' 

'Soon.' 

T wish I understood this business of "ritual manager".' 

'It's not easy.' 

The smoke from the fire blew in our faces but at least kept 
away the flies. 

I took out my notebook and propped it on my knee. 

The first step, Arkady said, was to get to grips with two more 
Aboriginal expressions: kirda and kutungurlu. 

Old Alan was kirda: that is to say, he was the 'owner' or 
'boss' of the land we were going to survey. He was responsible 
for its upkeep, for making sure its songs were sung and its rituals 
performed on time. 

The man in blue, on the other hand, was Alan's kutungurlu, 
his 'manager' or 'helper'. He belonged to a different totemic 
clan and was a nephew — real or 'classificatory', that didn't 
matter — on Alan's mother's side of the family. The word 
kutungurlu itself meant 'uterine kin'. 

'So the "manager"', I said, 'always has a different Dreaming 
to the boss?' 

'He does.' 

Each enjoyed reciprocal rites in each other's country, and 
worked as a team to maintain them. The fact that 'boss' and 
'manager' were seldom men of the same age meant that ritual 
knowledge went ricocheting down the generations. 

In the old days, Europeans believed the 'boss' was really 
'boss' and the 'manager' some kind of sidekick. This, it turned 
out, was wishful thinking. Aboriginals themselves sometimes 
translated kutungurlu as 'policeman' - which gave a far more 
accurate idea of the relationship. 

'The "boss"', said Arkady, 'can hardly make a move without 
his "policeman's" permission. Take the case of Alan here. The 
nephew tells me they're both very worried the railway's going to 
destroy an important Dreaming site: the eternal resting place of 
a Lizard Ancestor. But it's up to him, not Alan, to decide if they 
should come with us or not.' 

The magic of the system, he added, was that responsibility for 
land resides ultimately, not with the 'owner', but with a member 
of the neighbouring clan. 

'And vice versa?'I asked. 

'Of course.' 

'Which would make war between neighbours rather 
difficult?' 

'Checkmated,' he said. 
'It'd be like America and Russia agreeing to swap their own 
internal politics -' 
'Ssh!' Arkady whispered. 'They're coming.' 

20 

THE MAN IN BLUE was coming through the spinifex at the pace 
of a slow march. Alan followed a step or two behind, his stetson 
rammed low over his forehead. His face was a mask of fury and 
self-control. He sat down next to Arkady, crossed his legs and 
laid his .zz across his knee. 

Arkady unrolled the survey map, weighting the corners with 
stones to stop them lifting in the blasts. He pointed to various 
hills, roads, bores, fences—and the probable route of the railway. 

Alan looked on with the composure of a general at a staff 
meeting. From time to time, he would stretch a questioning 
finger to some feature on the map, and then withdraw it. 

I mistook this performance for a charade: it never dawned on 
me the old man could map-read. But then he splayed both first 
and second fingers into a V and ran them up and down the sheet, 
like dividers, his lips working silently, at speed. He was, as 
Arkady told me later, measuring off a Songline. 

Alan accepted a cigarette from Big Tom and continued to 
smoke in silence. 

A few minutes later, a ramshackle truck drove up, with two 
white men in front and a black stockhand hunched against the 
tailboard. The driver, a thin, weatherlined man with sideburns 
and a greasy brown hat, got out and shook hands with Arkady. 
He was Frank Olson, the owner of Middle Bore Station. 

'And this here', he said, pointing to his younger companion, 'is 
my partner, Jack.' 

Both men were wearing shorts and grubby sweatshirts and 
desert boots without laces or socks. Their legs were scabbed and 
pitted by thorns and insect bites. Because they looked so grim 
and purposeful, Arkady shifted to the defensive. He needn't 
have worried. All Olson wanted was to know where the railway 
line was going. 

He squatted over the map. 'Lemme see what the buggers are up 
to,' he said angrily. 

For the past two weeks, he told us, the bulldozers had cleared a 
wide swathe through the bush right up to his southern boundary 
fence. If they went on following the line of the watershed, they'd 
wreck his catchment system. 

The map, however, showed the projected route curving away 
to the east. 

'Whew!' said Olson, pushing his hat to the back of his 
head and wiping the perspiration with his palm. 'No one thought 
to tell me, of course.' 

He spoke of falling beef prices, and the drought, and dead 
beasts everywhere. In a good year, they had twelve inches of rain. 
This year, so far, they'd had eight. Cut that to seven and he'd be 
out of business. 

Arkady asked Olson's permission to camp beside one of his 
dams. 
'Right by me!' he said, rolling an eye at Alan and winking. 
'You'd better ask the Boss.' 
The old man didn't move a muscle but a faint smile filtered 
through the waves of his beard. 
Olson stood up. 'Be seeing you,' he said. 'Look in for a bite of 
tea tomorrow.' 
'We will,' said Arkady. 'Thanks.' 

The evening had settled into a golden calm when we saw a streak 
of dust along the line of the road. It was Marian. 

She drove up at the wheel of her old grey Land-Rover, through 
the humpies, and parked fifty yards short of our fire. Two 
brawny women, Topsy and Gladys, squeezed themselves out of 
the cab and there were four thinner women behind. They jumped 
down, brushed off the dust, and flexed their arms and legs. 

'You're late,' Arkady scolded her, playfully. 

Her cheeks were creased with tiredness. 

'You'd have been late,' she laughed. 

Since leaving Alice Springs, she'd driven 300 miles; treated a 
boy for scorpion bite; dosed a baby for dysentery; drawn an 
elder's abscessed tooth; sewn up a woman who'd been beaten by 
her husband; sewn up the husband, who'd been beaten by the 
brother-in-law. 

'And now', she said, 'I'm famished.' 

Arkady fetched her a French roll and a mug of tea. He was 
worried in case she was too tired to go on. 'We can spend the 
night where we are,' he said. 

'No, thank you,' she said. 'Let's get out of here.' 

She had on the same skimpy flower-printed dress. She sat on 
the front bumper, planted her legs apart and stuffed the roll 
between her teeth. I tried to talk to her, but she looked straight 
through me, smiling the smile of a woman on women's business. 

She drained the mug and handed it back to Arkady. 'Give me 
ten minutes,' she said. 'Then we'll go.' 

She strolled off and doused herself under a hydrant in the 
women's section of the camp. Then she strolled back, silhouetted 
against the sunlight, glistening wet all over, the wet dress 
flattened out over her breasts and hips, and her hair hanging 
loose in golden snakes. It was no exaggeration to say she looked 
like a Piero madonna: the slight awkwardness of her movements 
made her that much more attractive. 

A crowd of young mothers formed a ring round her. She 
hugged their babies, wiped the snot from their noses and the dirt 
off their behinds. She patted them, jogged them up and down, 
and handed them back. 

So what was it, I wondered, about these Australian women? 
Why were they so strong and satisfied, and so many of the men 
so drained? I tried to talk to her again, but again the blank smile 
warned me off. 

'What's up with Marian?' I asked Arkady as we packed the 
gear. 'I think I've done something wrong.' 
'Don't worry,' he said. 'She's always that way when she's 
with the women.' 
If the women saw her hobnobbing with a stranger, they'd 
think she was a blabmouth and tell nothing. 

'Yes,' I said. 'That would explain it.' 

'Come on, you mob,' he called the men away from the fire. 
'We're off.' 

21 

THE LAND CRUISER bumped and lurched along a double rut of 
dust, the bushes brushing the underside of the chassis. Alan sat 
in front with Timmy, with his rifle upright between his knees. 
Marian followed hard after, with the ladies. We crossed a 
sandy gully and had to change to four-wheel drive. A black 
horse reared up, whinnied and galloped off. 

On ahead the country was open woodland. The trees made 
dark stripes of shadow over the grass and the ghost-gums, at 
this orange hour of the evening, seemed to float above the 
ground, like balloons that had let down their anchors. 

Alan raised his hand for Arkady to stop, whipped the .22 
through the window and fired into a bush. A female kangaroo 
and young broke cover and leaped away in great lolloping 
bounds, their haunches white against the grey of the scrub. 

Alan fired again, and again. Then he and the man in blue 
jumped out and sprinted after them. 
'Giant red,' said Arkady. 'They come out for water at 
sunset.' 

'Did he hit her?' 

'Don't think so,' he said. 'No. Look, they're coming back.' 

Alan's hat showed up first, above the level of the grass 
heads. The man in blue's shirt was ripped at the shoulder, and 
he was bleeding from a thorn scratch. 

'Bad luck, old man,' said Arkady to Alan. 

Alan re-cocked the rifle and glared from the window. 

The sun was touching the treetops when we came to a 
wind-pump and some abandoned stock-pens. There had been 
a settlement here in the old days. There were heaps of rotted 
grey timbers and the wreck of a stockman's house. The windpump 
spurted a steady stream of water into two round galvanised 
tanks. 

A flock of galahs sat perched around the rim of the tanks, 
several hundred of them, pink-crested cockatoos which flew up 
as we approached and wheeled overhead: the undersides of 
their wings were the colour of wild roses. 

Everyone in the party surrounded a drinking trough, splashed 
the dirt from their faces, and filled their water-cans. 
I made a point of avoiding Marian, but she came up from 
behind and pinched me on the bum. 

'Getting to learn the rules, I see,' she grinned. 

'Madwoman.' 

The country away to the east,was a flat and treeless waste 
entirely lacking in cover. Alan kept raising a finger to a solitary 
bump on the horizon. It was almost dark by the time we reached 
a small rocky hill, its boulders bursting with the white plumes of 
spinifex in flower, and a black fuzz of leafless mallee bush. 

The hill, said Arkady, was the Lizard Ancestor's resting place. 

The party split into two camps, each within earshot of the 
other. The men settled themselves and their swags in a circle, 
and began talking in hushed voices. While Arkady unpacked, I 
went off to hack some firewood. 

I had lit the fire, using bark and grass for tinder, when we 
heard the sound of pandemonium from the women's camp. 
Everyone was shrieking and howling, and against the light of 
their fires I could make out Mavis, hopping this way and that, 
and gesturing to something on the ground. 

'What's up?' Arkady called to Marian. 

'Snake!' she called back, cheerfully. 

It was only a snake-trail in the sand, but that was snake 
enough to put the women into hysterics. 

The men, too, began to get twitchy. Led by Big Tom, they 
jumped to their feet. Alan re-cocked the .22. The two others 
armed themselves with sticks; scrutinised the sand; spoke in 
hoarse, emotional whispers; and waved their arms like hammy 
Shakespearean actors. 

'Take no notice,' said Arkady. 'They're only showing off. All 
the same, I think I'll sleep on the roof of the Land Cruiser.' 

'Chicken!'I said. 

For myself, I rigged up a 'snakeproof groundsheet to sleep 
on, tying each corner to a bush, so its edges were a foot from the 
ground. Then I began to cook supper. 

The fire was far too hot for grilling steaks without charring 
them: I almost charred myself as well. Alan looked on with 
masterful indifference. None of the others gave one word of 
thanks for their food, but kept passing back their plates for 
more. Finally, when they were satisfied, they resumed their 
conference. 

'You know who they remind me of?' I said to Arkady. 'A 
boardroom of bankers.' 
'Which is what they are,' he said. 'They're deciding how 
little to give us.' 

The steak was charred and tough, and after Hanlon's lunch 
we had very little appetite. We cleared up and went to join the 
old men's circle. The firelight lapped their faces. The moon 
came up. We could just discern the profile of the hill. 

We sat in silence until Arkady, judging the moment, turned 
to Alan and asked quietly, in English, 'So what's the story of 
this place, old man?' 

Alan gazed into the fire without twitching a muscle. The skin 
stretched taut over his cheekbones and shone. Then, almost 
imperceptibly, he tilted his head towards the man in blue, who 
got to his feet and began to mime (with words of pidgin thrown 
in) the travels of the Lizard Ancestor. 

It was a song of how the lizard and his lovely young wife 
had walked from northern Australia to the Southern Sea, and 
of how a southerner had seduced the wife and sent him home 
with a substitute. 

I don't know what species of lizard he was supposed to be: 
whether he was a 'jew-lizard' or a 'road-runner' or one of 
those rumpled, angry-looking lizards with ruffs around their 
necks. All I do know is that the man in blue made the most 
lifelike lizard you could ever hope to imagine. 

He was male and female, seducer and seduced. He was 
glutton, he was cuckold, he was weary traveller. He would 
claw his lizard-feet sideways, then freeze and cock his head. He 
would lift his lower lid to cover the iris, and flick out his 
lizard-tongue. He puffed his neck into goitres of rage; and at 
last, when it was time for him to die, he writhed and wriggled, 
his movements growing fainter and fainter like the Dying 
Swan's. 

Then his jaw locked, and that was the end. 

The man in blue waved towards the hill and, with the 
triumphant cadence of someone who has told the best of all 
possible stories, shouted: 'That. . . that is where he is!' 

The performance had lasted not more than three minutes. 

The death of the lizard touched us and made us sad. But Big 
Tom and Timmy had been in stitches since the wife-swapping 
episode and went on hooting and cackling long after the man in 
blue sat down. Even the resigned and beautiful face of old Alan 
composed itself into a smile. Then one by one they yawned, and 
spread out their swags, and curled up and went to sleep. 

'They must have liked you,' Arkady said. 'It was their way of 
saying thanks for the food.' 

We lit a hurricane lamp and sat on a couple of campingchairs, 
away from the fire. What we had witnessed, he said, was 
not of course the real Lizard song, but a 'false front', or sketch 
performed for strangers. The real song would have named each 
waterhole the Lizard Man drank from, each tree he cut a spear 
from, each cave he slept in, covering the whole long distance of 
the way. 

He had understood the pidgin far better than I. This is the 
version I then jotted down: 

The Lizard and his wife set off to walk to the Southern Sea. The 
wife was young and beautiful and had far lighter skin than her 
husband. They crossed swamps and rivers until they stopped at 
a hill—the hill at Middle Bore — and there they slept the night. In 
the morning they passed the camp of some Dingoes, where a 
mother was suckling a brood of pups. 'Ha!' said the Lizard. Til 
remember those pups and eat them later.' 

The couple walked on, past Oodnadatta, past Lake Eyre, and 
came to the sea at Fort Augusta. A sharp wind was blowing off 
the sea, and the Lizard felt cold and began to shiver. He saw, on 
a headland nearby, the campfire of some Southerners and said 
to his wife, 'Go over to those people and borrow a firestick.' 

She went. But one of the Southerners, lusting after her lighter 
skin, made love to her - and she agreed to stay with him. He 
made his own wife paler by smearing her from head to foot with 
yellow ochre and sent her, with the firestick, to the solitary 
traveller. Only when the ochre rubbed off did the Lizard realise 
his loss. He stamped his feet. He puffed himself up in fury, but, 
being a stranger in a distant country, he was powerless to take 
revenge. Miserably, he turned for home with his uglier, substitute 
wife. On the way be stopped to kill and eat the Dingo puppies but 
these gave him indigestion and made him sick. On reaching the 
hill at Middle Bore, he lay down and died .. . 

And that, as the man in blue told us, was where he was. 

Arkady and I sat mulling over this story of an antipodean 
Helen. The distance from here to Port Augusta, as the crow flew, 
was roughly 1,100 miles, about twice the distance — so we 
calculated- from Troy to Ithaca. We tried to imagine an Odyssey 
with a verse for every twist and turn of the hero's ten-year voyage. 

I looked at the Milky Way and said, 'You might as well count 
the stars.' 

Most tribes, Arkady went on, spoke the language of their 
immediate neighbour, so the difficulties of communication 
across a frontier did not exist. The mystery was how a man of 
Tribe A, living up one end of a Songline, could hear a few bars 
sung by Tribe Q and, without knowing a word of Q's language, 
would know exactly what land was being sung. 

'Christ!' I said. 'Are you telling me that-Old Alan here would 
know the songs for a country a thousand miles away?' 

'Most likely.' 

'Without ever having been there?' 

'Yes.' 

One or two ethnomusicologists, he said, had been working on 
the problem. In the meantime, the best thing was to imagine a 
little experiment of our own. 

Supposing we found, somewhere near Port Augusta, a songman 
who knew the Lizard song? Suppose we got him to sing his 
verses into a tape-recorder and then played the tape to Alan in 
Kaititj country? The chances were he'd recognise the melody at 
once—j ust as we would the 'Moonlight' Sonata - but the meaning 
of the words would escape him. All the same, he'd listen very 
attentively to the melodic structure. He'd perhaps even ask us to 
replay a few bars. Then, suddenly, he'd find himself in sync and be 
able to sing his own words over the 'nonsense'. 

'His own words for country round Port Augusta?' 

'Yes,' said Arkady. 

'Is that what really happens?' 

'It is.' 

'How the hell's it done?' 

No one, he said, could be sure. There were people who argued 
for telepathy. Aboriginals themselves told stories of their songmen 
whizzing up and down the line in trance. But,there was 
another, more astonishing possibility. 

Regardless of the words, it seems the melodic contour of the 
song describes the nature of the land over which the song passes. 
So, if the Lizard Man were dragging his heels across the saltpans 
of Lake Eyre, you could expect a succession of long flats, 
like Chopin's 'Funeral March'. If he were skipping up and down 
the MacDonnell escarpments, you'd have a series of arpeggios 
and glissandos, like Liszt's 'Hungarian Rhapsodies'. 

Certain phrases, certain combinations of musical notes, are 
thought to describe the action of the Ancestor's feet. One phrase 
would say, 'Salt-pan'; another 'Creek-bed', 'Spinifex', 'Sandhill', 
'Mulga-scrub', 'Rock-face' and so forth. An expert songman, 
by listening to their order of succession, would count how 
many times his hero crossed a river, or scaled a ridge — and be 
able to calculate where, and how far along, a Songline he was. 

'He'd be able', said Arkady 'to hear a few bars and say, "This 
is Middle Bore" or "That is Oodnadatta" — where the Ancestor 
did X or Y or Z.' 

'So a musical phrase', I said, 'is a map reference?' 

'Music', said Arkady, 'is a memory bank for finding one's 
way about the world.' 

'I shall need some time to digest that.' 

'You've got all night,' he smiled. 'With the snakes!' 

The fire was still blazing in the other camp and we heard the 
burble of women's laughter. 

'Sleep well,' he said. 

'And you.' 

'I never had so much fun', he said, 'as I do with my old men.' 

I tried to sleep but couldn't. The ground under my sleepingbag 
was hard and lumpy. I tried counting the stars around the 
Southern Cross, but my thoughts kept returning to the man in 
blue. He reminded me of someone. I had the memory of another 
man miming an almost identical story, with the same kind of 
animal gestures. Once, in the Sahel, I had watched some dancers 
mime the antics of antelopes and storks. But that was not the 
memory I was looking for. 

Then I had it. 
'Lorenz!' 

22 

THE AFTERNOON I met Konrad Lorenz he was working in his 
garden at Altenberg, a small town on the Danube near Vienna. 
A hot east wind was blowing from the steppe. I had come to 
interview him for a newspaper. 

The 'Father of Ethology' was a gristly silver-spade-bearded 
man with arctic blue eyes and a face burned pink in the sun. His 
book On Aggression had outraged liberal opinion on both sides 
of the Atlantic - and was a gift to the 'conservatives'. His 
enemies had then unearthed a half-forgotten paper, published 
in 1942, the year of the Final Solution, in which Lorenz had 
pressed his theory of instinct into the service of racial biology. In 
1973 he had been awarded the Nobel Prize. 

He introduced me to his wife, who set down her weeding 
basket and smiled, distantly, from beneath the brim of her straw 
hat. We made polite conversation about the difficulty of 
propagating violets. 

'My wife and F, he said, 'have known each other since 
childhood. We used to play at iguanodons in the shrubbery.' 

He led the way towards the house — a grandiose, neo-baroque 
mansion built by his father, a surgeon, in the good old days of 
Franz Josef. As he opened the front door, a pack of rangy, 
brown-coated mongrels rushed out, set their paws on my 
shoulder and licked my face. 

'What are these dogs?' I asked. 

'Pariah dogs!' he muttered grimly. 'Aach! I would have 
killed the whole litter. You see that chow, over there? Very 
fine animal! Grandparent a wolf! My wife took her round all 
the best chow studs in Bavaria to look for a dog. She refused 
them all . . . and then she copulated with a schnauzer!' 


We sat in his study, where there was a white faience stove, a 
fish-tank, a toy train and a mynah bird whooping in a cage. We 
began with a review of his career. 

At the age of six, he had read books on evolution and become a 
convinced Darwinian. Later, as a zoological student in Vienna, 
he had specialised in the comparative anatomy of ducks and 
geese: only to realise that they, in common with all other animals, 
also inherited 'blocs' or 'paradigms' of instinctive behaviour in 
their genes. The courtship ritual of a mallard drake was a 'setpiece'. 
The bird would wag its tail, shake its head, bob forward, 
crane its neck — performing a sequence of movements which, 
once triggered off, would run their predictable course and were 
no more separable from its nature than its webbed feet or glossy 
green head. 

Lorenz realised, too, that these 'fixed motor patterns' had been 
transformed by the process of natural selection and must have 
played some vital role in the survival of the species. They could be 
measured, scientifically, as one measured anatomical changes 
between one species and the next. 

'And that was how I discovered ethology,' he said. 'Nobody 
taught me. I thought it was a matter of course with all psychologists, 
because I was a child and full of respect for other 
people. I had not realised I was one of the pioneers.' , 

'Aggression', as Lorenz defined it, was the instinct in animals 
and man to seek and fight—though not necessarily to kill — a rival 
of their own kind. Its function was to ensure the equable distribution 
of a species over its habitat, and that the genes of the 'fittest' 
passed to the next generation. Fighting behaviour was not a 
reaction but a 'drive' or appetite-which, like the drives of hunger 
or sex, would build up and demand expression either on to the 
'natural' object, or, if none were available, on to a scapegoat. 

Unlike man, wild animals seldom fought to the death. Rather, 
they would 'ritualise' their squabbles in displays of tooth, plumage, 
scratch-marks or vocal calls. The intruder — providing, of 
course, he was the weaker intruder—would recognise these'Keep 
Out!' signs and withdraw without a scene. 

A defeated wolf, for example, had only to bare the nape of his 
neck and the victor could not press home his advantage. 

Lorenz presented On Aggression as the findings of an experienced 
naturalist who knew a lot about fighting in animals and 
had seen a lot of fighting among men. He had served as an orderly 
on the Russian Front. He had spent years in a Soviet prisonerof-
war camp, and had concluded that man was a 'dangerously 
aggressive' species. War, as such, was the collective outpouring 
of his frustrated fighting 'drives': behaviour which had seen him 
through bad times in the primeval bush, but was lethal in an age 
of the H-Bomb. 

Our fatal flaw, or Fall, he insisted, was to have developed 
'artificial weapons' instead of natural ones. As a species, we thus 
lacked the instinctive inhibitions which prevented the 'professional 
carnivores' from murdering their fellows. 

I had expected to find in Lorenz a person of old-fashioned 
courtesy and blinkered convictions, someone who had marvelled 
at the order and diversity of the animal kingdom and 
decided to shut out the painful, chaotic world of human 
contacts. I could not have been more mistaken. Here was a man 
as perplexed as any other, who, whatever his previous convictions, 
had an almost childlike compulsion to share the 
excitement of his discoveries, and to correct faults of fact or 
emphasis. 

He was a perfect mimic. He could project himself beneath the 
skin of any bird or beast or fish. When he imitated the jackdaw at 
the bottom of the 'pecking order', he became the wretched 
jackdaw. He became the pair of greylag ganders, entwining their 
necks as they performed the 'triumph ceremony'. And when he 
demonstrated the sexual see-saw of chiclid fish in his aquarium whereby 
a 'Brunhilde of a fish' refused the timid advances of her 
partner, yet turned into a simpering, all-too-submissive maiden 
the instant a real male entered the tank - Lorenz became, in turn, 
the 'Brunhilde', the weakling and the tyrant. 

He complained of being misinterpreted by people who read 
into the theory of aggression an excuse for endless war. 'This', 
he said, 'is simply libellous. "Aggressivity" is not necessarily to 
do harm to your neighbour. It may just be a "pushing-away" 
behaviour. You can effect the same consequences simply by 
disliking your neighbour. You can say, "Wauch!" and walk 
away when he croaks back. That's what frogs do.' 

Two singing frogs, he went on, would remove themselves as 
far as possible from each other, except at spawning time. The 
same was true of polar bears, which, fortunately for them, had a 
thin population. 

'A polar bear', he said, 'can afford to walk away from the 
other chap.' 
Similarly, in the Orinoco, there were Indians who would 
suppress tribal warfare with 'ritual' exchanges of gifts. 

'But surely', I butted in, 'this "gift exchange" is not a ritual to 
suppress aggression. It is aggression ritualised. Violence only 
breaks out when the parity of these exchanges is broken.' 

'Yes, yes,' he answered enthusiastically. 'Of course, of 
course.' 

He took a pencil from his desk and waved it towards me. 'If I 
give you this gift,' he said, 'that means "I'm territorial here." 
But it also means, "I have a territory and I am no threat to 
yours." All we're doing is fixing the frontier. I say to you, "Here 
I put my gift. I'm not going any further." It would be an offence 
if I put my gift too far. 

'Territory, you see,' he added, 'is not necessarily the place you 
feed in. It's the place in which you stay . . . where you know 
every nook and cranny . . . where you know by heart every 
refuge . . . where you are invincible to the pursuer. I've even 
measured it with sticklebacks.' 

He then gave an unforgettable performance of two angry 
male sticklebacks. Both were unbeatable at the centre of their 
territory. Both became progressively more fearful and vulnerable 
as they strayed from it. They would skirmish to and fro 
until they found an equilibrium and, afterwards, kept their 
distance. As he told the story, Lorenz crossed his hands under 
his chin splaying his fingers to imitate the stickleback spines. He 
coloured at the gills. He paled. He inflated and deflated, lunged 
and fled. 

It was this imitation, of the impotent, retreating stickleback, 
that reminded me, here at Middle Bore, of the cuckolded Lizard 
Man, who strayed from his own home country and lost his 
lovely wife to a stranger. 

23 

WHEN I WOKE NEXT morning I was lying in the middle of the 
bright blue groundsheet, and the sun was up. The old men 
wanted more meat for breakfast. The ice in the 'Eski' had 
melted in the night and the steaks were swimming in bloodcoloured 
water. We decided to cook them before they went 
'off. 

I re-lit the embers of the fire while Arkady held a conference 
with Alan and the man in blue. He showed them on the survey 
map how the railway would miss the Lizard Rock by at least 
two miles and got them, reluctantly, to agree to this. Next, he 
pointed to the twenty-five-mile stretch of country through 
which he intended to drive. 

For most of the morning the vehicles edged slowly northwards 
over broken ground. The sun was blinding and the 
vegetation parched and drear. To the east, the land dropped 
away and lifted towards a ridge of pale sandhills. The valley in 
between was covered with a continuous thicket of mulga trees, 
leafless at this season, silver-grey like a blanket of low-lying 
mist. 

Nothing moved except the shimmering heatwaves. 

We kept crossing the path of fires. In places, all that survived 
of the bushes were upright, fire-hardened spikes, which staked 
our tyres as we ran over them. We had three flats, and Marian 
had two in the Land-Rover. Whenever we stopped to change a 
wheel, dust and ash blew in our eyes. The women would jump 
down, delightedly, and go off to look for bush-tucker. 

Mavis was in a very boisterous mood, and wanted to repay 
me for the thongs. She grabbed my hand and dragged me 
towards a limp, green bush. 

'Hey! Where are you two going?' Arkady called. 

'Get him some bush-bananas,' she shouted back. 'He don't 
know bush-bananas.' But the bananas, when we got to them, 
had shrivelled up to nothing. 

Another time, she and Topsy tried to run down a goanna, but 
the reptile was far too quick for them. At last, she found a plant 
of ripe solanum berries and showered them on me in handfuls. 
They looked and tasted like unripe cherry-tomatoes. I ate some 
to please her and she said, 'There you are, dearie,' and reached 
out her chubby hand and stroked my cheek. 

When anything in the landscape even half-resembled a 
'feature' Arkady would brake and ask Old Alan, 'What's that 
one?' or, 'Is this country clear?' 

Alan glared from the window at his 'domain'. 

Around noon, we came to a clump of eucalyptus: the only 
patch of green in sight. Nearby there was an outcrop of 
sandstone, about twenty feet long and scarcely visible above the 
surface. It had shown up on the aerial survey, and was one of 
three identical outcrops lying in line along the ridge. 

Arkady told Alan that the engineer might want to quarry this 
rock for ballast. He might want to blast it with dynamite. 

'How about that, old man?'he asked. 

Alan said nothing. 

'No story here? Or nothing?' 

He said nothing. 

'So the country's clear, then?' 

'No,' Alan took a deep sigh. 'The Babies.' 

'Whose babies?' 

'Babies,' he said — and in the same weary voice, he began to 
tell the story of the Babies. 

In the Dreamtime, the Bandicoot Man, Akuka, and his brother 
were hunting along this ridge. Because it was the dry season, 
they were terribly hungry and thirsty. Every bird and animal 
had fled. The trees were stripped of leaves and bush fires swept 
across the country. 

The hunters searched everywhere for an animal to kill until, 
almost at his final gasp, Akuka saw a bandicoot bolting for its 
burrow. His brother warned him not to kill it, for to kill one's 
own kind was taboo. Akuka ignored the warning. 

He dug the bandicoot from the burrow, speared it, skinned 
and ate it, and immediately felt cramps in his stomach. His 
stomach swelled and swelled, and then it burst, and a throng of 
Babies spewed forth and started crying for water. 

Dying of thirst, the Babies travelled north up to Singleton, and 
south back to Taylor Creek, where the dam now is. They found 
the soakage, but drank up all the water and returned to the three 
rocky outcrops. The rocks were the Babies, huddled together as 
they lay down to die — although, as it happened, they did not die 
yet. 

Their uncle, Akuka's brother, heard their cries and called on 
his western neighbours to make rain. The rain blew in from the 
west (the grey expanse of mulga was the thunderstorm metamorphosed 
into trees). The Babies turned on their tracks and 
wandered south again. While crossing a creek not far from 
Lizard Rock, they fell into the floodwaters and 'melted'. 

The name of the place where the Babies 'went back' was 
Akwerkepentye, which means 'far-travelling children'. 

When Alan came to the end of the story, Arkady said softly, 
'Don't worry, old man. It'll be all right. Nobody's going to touch 
the Babies.' 

Alan shook his head despairingly. 

'Are you happy then?' asked Arkady. 

No. He wasn't happy. Nothing about this wicked railway was 
going to make him happy: but at least the Babies might be safe. 

We moved ahead. 

'Australia', Arkady said slowly, 'is the country of lost 
children.' 

Another hour and we reached the northern boundary of Middle 
Bore Station. We now had one spare tyre for the Land Cruiser: so 
rather than risk returning the way we'd come, we decided to 
make a detour. There was an old dirt road which went east and 
then south and came out behind Alan's settlement. On the last lap 
we ran in with the railway people. 

They were clearing the country along the proposed line of 
track. Their earth-movers had cut a sweep through the mulga, 
and a strip of churned-up soil about a hundred yards wide now 
stretched away into the distance. 

The old men looked miserably at the stacks of broken trees. 

We stopped to talk to a black-bearded titan. He was more than 
seven feet tall and might have been made of bronze. Stripped to 
the waist, in a straw hat and stubbies, he was driving in markerposts 
with a hammer. He was off, in an hour or two, to Adelaide 
on leave. 'Oh boy,' he said. 'Am I ever glad to get out of here?' 

The road had gone. Our vehicles crawled and slewed in the 
loose red dirt. Three times we had to get out and push. Arkady 
was whacked. I suggested we stop for a break. We turned aside 
into the sketchy shade of some trees. There were ant-hills everywhere, 
splashed with bird shit. He unpacked some food and 
drink, and rigged up the groundsheet as an awning. 

We had expected the old men, as always, to be hungry. 
But they all sat huddled together, moping, refusing either to eat 
or to talk: to judge from their expressions you would have said 
they were in pain. 

Marian and the ladies had parked under a different tree, and 
they, too, were silent and gloomy. 

A yellow bulldozer went by in a cloud of dust. 

Arkady lay down, covered his head with a towel, and started 
snoring. Using my leather rucksack as a pillow, I leaned back 
against a tree-trunk and leafed through Ovid's Metamorphoses. 

The story of Lykaeon's transformation into a wolf took me 
back to a blustery spring day in Arkadia and seeing, in the 
limestone cap of Mount Lykaeon itself, an image of the crouching 
beast-king. I read of Hyacinth and Adonis; of Deucalion and 
the Flood; and how the 'living things' were created from the 
warm Nilotic ooze. And it struck me, from what I now knew of 
the Songlines, that the whole of Classical mythology might 
represent the relics of a gigantic 'song-map': that all the to-ing 
and fro-ing of gods and goddesses, the caves and sacred springs, 
the sphinxes and chimaeras, and all the men and women who 
became nightingales or ravens, echoes or narcissi, stones or stars 

— could all be interpreted in terms of totemic geography. 
I must have dozed off myself, for when I woke my face was 
covered with flies and Arkady was calling, 'Come on. Let's go.' 
We got back to Middle Bore an hour before sunset. The Land 
Cruiser had hardly stopped moving before Alan and the man in 
blue opened their doors and walked away without a nod. Big 
Tom mumbled something about the railway being 'bad'. 
Arkady looked crushed. 'Hell!' he said. 'What's the use?' 

He blamed himself for letting them see the earth-movers. 

'You shouldn't,' I said. 

'But I do.' 

'They were bound to see it one day.' 

'I'd rather not with me.' 

We freshened up under a hosepipe, and I revived our hearth of 
the day before. Marian joined us, sitting on a sawn-off tree stump 
and unravelling her tangle of hair. She then compared notes with 
Arkady. The women had told her of a Songline called 'Two 
Dancing Women', but it never touched the line of the railway. 

We looked up to see a procession of women and children on 
their way back from foraging. The babies swayed peacefully in 
the folds of their mothers' dresses. 

'You never hear them cry,' Marian said, 'as long as the 
mother keeps moving.' 

She had touched, unwittingly, on one of my favourite topics. 
'And if babies can't bear to lie still,' I said, 'how shall we settle 
down later?' 

She jumped to her feet. 'Which reminds me, I've got to go.' 

'Now?' 

'Now. I promised Gladys and Topsy they'd be home tonight.' 

'Can't they stay here?' I asked. 'Couldn't we all spend the 
night here?' 

'You can,' she said, playfully sticking out her tongue. 'I can't.' 

I looked at Arkady, who shrugged, as if to say, 'When she gets 
an idea into her head, no power on earth's going to stop her.' 
Five minutes later, she had rounded up the women and, with a 
cheerful wave, was gone. 

'That woman', I said, 'is the Pied Piper.' 

'Dammit!' said Arkady. 

He reminded me of our promise to look in on Frank Olson. 

At the station-house, a large woman with heat-ravaged skin 
came shuffling to the front door, peered through the fly-screen 
and opened up. 
'Frank's gone down to Glen Armond,' she said. 'An emergency! Jim Hanlon's taken sick!' 

'When was that?'asked Arkady. 

'Last night,' said the woman. 'Collapsed in the pub.' 

'We should get the chaps and go,' he said. 

'Yes,' I agreed. 'I think we'd better go.' 

24 

THE BARMAN OF THE MOTEL at Glen Armond said that Hanlon 
had come in around nine the night before and bragged of renting 
his caravan to an English 'literary gent'. On the strength of this 
transaction, he put back five double Scotches, fell and banged his 
head on the floor. Expecting him to be sober by morning, they 
carried him to a room out back. There, in the early hours, a 
truckie heard him groaning and they found him, on the floor 
again, clutching his abdomen, with his shirt torn to ribbons. 

They called his mate, Frank Olson, who drove him down to 
Alice. He was on the operating table by eleven. 
'Some talk of a blockage,' said the barman sententiously. 
'Usually means one thing.' 

There was a pay-phone on the bar. Arkady put through a call 
to the hospital. The nurse on duty said Hanlon was comfortable, 
and asleep. 

'So what's the matter?' I asked. 

'She wouldn't say.' 

The bar itself was made up of disused wooden railwaysleepers 
and above it hung a notice: ALL LIQUOR MUST BE 
CONSUMED ON THE PREMISES. 

I looked at a picture on the wall. It was an artist's impression, 
in watercolour, of the proposed Glen Armond Memorial Dingo 
Complex. The word 'memorial' referred to the dingo which 
either ate, or did not eat, the infant Azaria Chamberlain. The 
plans called for a fibreglass dingo about sixty feet high, with a 
spiral staircase up its forelegs and a dark-red restaurant inside 
its belly. 

'Incredible,' I said. 

'No,' said Arkady. 'Humorous.' 

The night bus to Darwin drew up outside, and the bar filled 
up with passengers. There were Germans, Japanese, a pink
kneed Englishman and the usual cast of Territorians. They ate 
pie and ice-cream, drank, went outside to piss, and came back to 
drink again. The stopover lasted fifteen minutes. Then the 
driver called and they all trooped out, leaving the bar to its core 
of regulars. 

At the far end of the room, a fat Lebanese was playing pool 
with a gaunt, fair-haired young man who had one wall-eye and 
was trying to explain, in a stutter, how Aboriginal kinship 
systems were 'so . . . so . . . co-com . . . fu . . . fuckin'-plex'. At 
the bar, a big man with a purple birthmark on his neck was 
methodically swilling Scotches through his rotted teeth, and 
talking to the police patrolman whom we had met the day 
before at Burnt Flat. 

He had changed into jeans, a gold neck-chain and a clean 
white singlet. Out of uniform, he appeared to have shrunk. His 
arms were thin and white above the line of his shirt cuffs. His 
Alsatian lay very still, leashed to the bar-stool, eyeing some 
Aboriginals, its ears pricked up and tongue extended. 

The policeman turned to me, 'So what'll it be?' 

I hesitated. 

'What are you drinking?' 

'Scotch and soda,' I said. 'Thank you.' 

'Ice?' 

'Ice.' 

'So you're a writer, eh?' 

'News gets around.' 

'What kind of writing?' 

'Books,' I said. 

'Published?' 

'Yes.' 

'Science fiction?' 

'NO!' 

'Ever write a best-seller ?' 

'Never.' 

'I'm thinking of writing a best-seller myself.' 

'Good on you.' 

'You wouldn't believe some of the stories I hear.'

'I certainly would.' 

'Unbelievable stories,' he said in his thin, petulant voice. 'It's 
all there.' 

'Where?' 

'In my head.' 

'The great thing's to get it on to paper.' 

'I got a great title.' 

'Good.' 

'You want me to tell you?' 

'If you like.' 

He dropped his jaw and gaped at me, 'You must be joking, 
mate. You think I'd give away my title. You might use it! That 
title's worth money.' 

'Then you should hang on to it.' 

'A title', he said, with great feeling, 'can make or break a 
book.' 

Think of Ed McBain! Killer's Pay-Off\Think of Shark City I 
Or Eden's Burningl Think of The Day of the Dogl Great titles. 
The cash value of his title he estimated at 50,000 US dollars. 
With a title like that, you could make a great movie. Even 
without the book! 

'Even without the story?' I suggested. 

'Could do,' he nodded. 

Titles changed hands for millions, he said, in the United 
States. Not that he was going to sell off his title to a movie 
company. The title and the story belonged together. 
'No,' he shook his head, thoughtfully. 'I wouldn't want to 
part them.' 

'You shouldn't.' 

'Maybe we could collaborate?' he said. 

He visualised an artistic and business partnership. He would 
provide the title and the story. I would write the book because 
he, as a policeman, did not have the leisure for writing. 

'Writing takes time,' I agreed. 

'Would you be interested?' 

'No.' 

He looked disappointed. He was not prepared, yet, to tell me 
the title, but to whet my appetite he proposed to let me in on 
the plot. The plot of this unbelievable story began with an 
Aboriginal being flattened by a road-train. 

'And?' 

'I better tell you,' he said. 

He moistened his lips. He had come to a big decision. 

'Body Bag,' he said. 

'Body Bag?' 

He closed his eyes and smiled. 

'I never told anyone before,' he said. 

'But Body Bag}' 

'The bag you put the body in. I told you the story starts with a 
dead coon on the highway.' 
'You did.' 
'You like it?' he asked, anxiously. 
'No.' 
'I mean the title.' 
'I know you mean the title.' 
I turned to the man with the purple birthmark, who was sitting 

on my left. He had been stationed in England, during the war, 
near Leicester. He had fought in France and then married a girl 
from Leicester. The wife came to live in Australia, but went back 
with their child, to Leicester. 

He had heard we were surveying sacred sites. 

'Know the best thing to do with a sacred site?' he drawled. 

'What?' 

'Dynamite!' 

He grinned and raised his glass to the Aboriginals. The 
birthmark oscillated as he drank. 
One of the Aboriginals, a very thin hill-billy type with a frenzy 
of matted hair, leaned both elbows on the counter, and listened. 

'Sacred sites!' the big man leered. 'If all what them says was 
sacred sites, there'd be three hundred bloody billion sacred sites 
in Australia.' 

'Not far wrong, mate!' called the thin Aboriginal. 

Over on my right I could hear Arkady talking to the policeman. 
They had both lived in Adelaide, in the suburb of St Peters. 
They had gone to the same school. They'd had the same maths 
master, but the policeman was five years older. 

'It's a small world,' he said. 

'It is,' said Arkady. 

'So why do you bother with them?' The policeman jerked his 
thumb at the Aboriginals. 
'Because I like them.' 
'And I like them,' he said, i like them! I like to do what's right 

by them. But they're different.' 

'In what way different?' 
The policeman moistened his lips again, and sucked the air 
between his teeth. 

'Made differently,' he said at last. 'They've got different 
urinary tracts to the white man. Different waterworks! That's 
why they can't hold their booze!' 

'How do you know?' 

'It's been proved,' said the policeman. 'Scientifically.' 

'Who by?' 

'I don't recall.' 

The fact was, he went on, there should be two different 
drinking laws: one for whites and one for blacks. 
'You think so?' said Arkady. 
'Penalise a man for having better waterworks?' said the 
policeman, his voice lifting in indignation. 'It's unfair. It's 
unconstitutional.' 

The Alsatian whined, and he patted it on the head. 

From having different waterworks was an easy step to having 
different grey-matter. An Aboriginal brain, he said, was different 
to that of Caucasians. The frontal lobes were flatter. 
Arkady narrowed his eyes to a pair of Tatar slits. He was 
now quite nettled. 

'I like them,' the policeman repeated. 'I never said I didn't like 
them. But they're like children. They've got a childish mentality.' 


'What makes you think so?' 

'They're incapable of progress,' he said. 'And that's what's 
wrong with you Land Rights people. You're standing in the way 
of progress. You're helping them destroy white Australia.' 

'Let me buy you a drink?' I interrupted. 
'No, thanks,' the policeman snapped. His face was working 
wrathfully. His fingernails, I noticed, were bitten to the quick. 

Arkady waited a moment or two, until he'd got control of his 
temper, and then began to explain, slowly and reasonably, how 
the surest way of judging a man's intelligence was his ability to 
handle words. 

Many Aboriginals, he said, by our standards would rank as 
linguistic geniuses. The difference was one of outlook. The 
whites were forever changing the world to fit their doubtful 
vision of the future. The Aboriginals put all their mental 
energies into keeping the world the way it was. In what way was 
that inferior? 

The policeman's mouth shot downwards. 

'You're not Australian,' he said to Arkady. 

'I bloody am Australian.' 

'No, you're not. I can tell you're not Australian.' 

'I was born in Australia.' 

'That doesn't make you Australian,' he taunted. 'My people 
have lived in Australia for five generations. So where was your 
father born?' 
Arkady paused and, with quiet dignity, answered, 'My father 
was born in Russia.' 
'Hey!' the policeman tightened his forelip and turned to the 
big man. 'What did I tell you, Bert? A Pom and a Com!' 

THE CLOUDS CAME UP in the night and the morning was 
overcast and muggy. We had bacon and eggs for breakfast in the 
bar of the motel. The owner's wife made us sandwiches for a 
picnic, and gave us ice for the 'Eski'. Arkady again called the 
hospital. 

They still won't say what's wrong,' he said as he hung up. 'I 
think it's bad.' 

We debated whether to go back to Alice, but there was 
nothing we could do, so we decided to press on to Cullen. 
Arkady spread the map over the table. The drive, he calculated, 
would take two days. We'd cut across country and spend the 
night at Popanji, and then go on to Cullen. 

The woman drinking coffee at the next banquette overheard 
us and asked, apologetically, if by any chance we were going 
past Lombardy Downs. 

Arkady glanced at the map. 

'It's on the way,' he said. 'Can we give you a lift?' 

'Oh no!' the woman cringed. 'No. No. I don't want to go 
there. I wondered if you'd take something for me. A letter.' 

She was an awkward, frayed young woman with lacklustre 
hair and unswerving amber eyes. She enunciated her syllables in 
a ladylike fashion, and wore a fawn-coloured dress with long 
sleeves. 

'I've got it written,' she said. 'You wouldn't mind, would 
you? I'll go and fetch it if you -' 

'Of course, we'll take it,' said Arkady. 

She ran off and came running back, out of breath, with the 
letter. She pushed it away from her, vehemently, on to the table. 
Then she began to finger a tiny gold crucifix around her neck. 

'It's for Bill Muldoon,' she said, staring dully at the name on 
the envelope. 'He's station-manager at Lombardy. He's my 
husband. Ask anyone to give it him. But if you see him .. . if he 
asks you if you've seen me . . . tell him I'm well.' 

She looked frail and miserable and sick. 

'Don't worry,' I said. 'We will' 

'Thanks,' she said in a constricted voice, and sat down to 
finish her coffee. 

We drove for three hours across a featureless plain. Showers 
had fallen in the night and laid the dust on the road. We saw 
some emus a long way off. The wind was rising. We saw 
something swinging from a solitary tree. It was a huge knitted 
teddy bear, with royal blue trousers and a scarlet cap. Someone 
had slashed it at the neck, and the kapok stuffing was spilling 
out. On the ground, there was a cross made from twigs, rubbed 
with ochre and its arms lashed together with hair-string. 

I picked up the cross and held it out to Arkady. 
'Aboriginal business,' he said. 'I wouldn't touch that if I were 
you.' 
I dropped it and got back into my seat. Up ahead, the sky was 
darkening. 

'It could be', said Arkady, 'that we're in for a storm.' 

We turned off at the sign marked Lombardy Downs. After a 
mile or so the track skirted round the end of a runway. An 
orange windsock blew horizontally in the whirring wind, and 
there was a light aircraft in the distance. 

The man who owned the station owned an airline. 

The homestead was a sprawling white house set back among 
some stunted trees, but closer to the strip there was a smaller, 
brick-built house alongside an open hangar. In the hangar were 
housed the owner's collection of vintage aeroplanes and cars. 
Parked beside a Tiger Moth were a Model'T' Ford and a Rolls-
Royce farm truck, its wooden sides painted brown with black 
trim. 

I told Arkady my father's story about the Rolls-Royce and the 
sheep millionaire. 

'Not so far-fetched after all,' I said. 

A blowsy woman appeared at the door in a green-spotted 
housecoat. Her blonde hair was up in curlers. 

'You boys looking for someone?' she called out. 

'Bill Muldoon,' I called back against the wind. 'We've got a 
letter for him.' 

'Muldoon's out,' she said. 'Come on in and I'll make you a 
coffee.' 

We went into a messy kitchen. Arkady put the letter on the 
table, on the red-checked oilcloth cover, next to some women's 
magazines. We sat down. An oil painting of Ayer's Rock hung 
aslant on the wall. The woman glanced at the writing on the 
envelope and shrugged. She was the other woman. 

While the kettle boiled, she unwrapped a half-eaten candy 
bar, nibbled off an inch or so, wrapped it up again, and licked 
the chocolate off her lips. 

'God, I am bored!' she said. 

The owner of the station, she told us, had flown up from 
Sydney for the weekend, so Muldoon was on call. She poured 
out our coffees and said again that she was bored. 

We were on the point of leaving when Muldoon came in — an 
athletic, red-faced man dressed from head to foot in black: 
black hat, boots, jeans and a black shirt open to the navel. He 
imagined we had come on business and shook our hands. The 
instant he saw the letter, he paled and clenched his jaw. 

'Get out of here,' he said. 

We left. 

'Unfriendly,' I said. 

'The pastoral ethic,' said Arkady. 'Same the world over.' 

Half an hour later we crossed a cattle-grid which marked the 
end of Lombardy Downs. We had narrowly missed a cloudburst 
and watched the chutes of rain slanting sideways towards a line 
of hills. We then joined the road from Alice to Popanji. 

The sides of the road were littered with abandoned cars, 
usually upside down, in heaps of broken glass. We stopped 
beside a rusty blue Ford with a black woman squatting beside it. 
The bonnet was open and a small boy, naked, stood sentinel on 
the roof. 

'What's up?' Arkady leaned from the window. 

'Plugs,'said the woman.'Gone to get new plugs.' 

'Who has?' 

'He has.' 

'Whereto?' 

'The Alice.' 

'How long's he been gone?' 

'Three days.' 

'You all right there?' 

'Yup,' the woman sniffed. 

'You got water and everything?' 

'Yup.' 

'You want a sandwich?' 

'Yup.' 

We gave the woman and boy three sandwiches. They grabbed 
them and ate them greedily. 
'You sure you're all right, then?' Arkady persisted. 
'Yup,' the woman nodded. 
'We can take you back to Popanji.' 
She gave a grumpy shake of the head and waved us away. 
Around lunchtime we crossed a creek with river-red-gums 

growing in its bed. It was a good place to picnic. We picked our 
way over waterworn boulders, and pools of stagnant yellow 
water with leaves afloat on the surface. The country to the west 
was grey and treeless, and cloud shadows were moving across it. 
There were no cattle, no fences, no wind-pumps: this country 
was too arid for grazing. We had left behind the cow shit: there 
were no more flies. 

As we walked up to one of the gum trees, a flock of black 
cockatoos flew out, squawking like rusty hinges, and settled on 
a dead gum up ahead. I took out my glasses and saw the flash of 
scarlet feathers glowing under their tails. 

We spread the picnic in the shade. The sandwiches were 
uneatable so we chucked them to the crows. But we had biscuits 
and cheese, olives and a can of sardines, and five cold beers 
between us. 

We talked politics, books and Russian books. He said how 
strange it was to feel oneself Russian in a country of Anglo-
Saxon prejudice. Spend an evening in a roomful of Sydney 
'intellectuals', and they'd all end up dissecting some obscure 
event within the first Penal Settlement. 

He looked around at the immense sweep of country. 

'Pity we didn't get here first,' he said. 

'We the Russians?' 

'Not only Russians,' he shook his head. 'Slavs, Hungarians, 
Germans even. Any people who could cope with wide horizons. 
Too much of this country went to islanders. They never 
understood it. They're afraid of space. 

'We', he added, 'could have been proud of it. Loved it for what 
it was. I don't think we'd have sold it off so easily.' 
'Yes,' I said. 'Why, in this country of untold resources, do 
Australians go on selling them off to foreigners?' 

'They'd sell off anything,' he shrugged. 

He then changed the subject and asked if ever, on my travels, 
I'd been with a hunting people. 
'Once,' I said. 'In Mauritania.' 
'Where's that?' 
'The western Sahara. They weren't so much a hunting tribe as a 
hunting caste. They were called the Nemadi.' 

'And hunted?' 

'Oryx and addax antelopes,' I said. 'With dogs.' 

In the city of Walata, once a capital of the Almoravid Empire and 
now a jumble of blood-coloured courtyards, I spent three whole 
days pestering the Governor to allow me to meet the Nemadi. 

The Governor, a morose hypochondriac, had been longing for 
someone to share the memory of his student days in Paris, or 
to argue doctrinal points of la pensee maotsetungienne. His 
favourite words were tactique and technique, but whenever I 
raised the question of the Nemadi, he'd let fly a brittle laugh and 
murmur, 'It is forbidden.' 

At mealtimes, a pink-fingered lutanist would serenade us 
through the couscous while the Governor reconstructed, with 
my prompting, a street map of the Quartier Latin. From his 
palace—if four mud-brick rooms were a palace—I could see a tiny 
white tent of the Nemadi beckoning me across the hillside. 

'But why do you wish to see these people?' the Governor 
shouted at me. 'Walata, yes! Walata is a historical place. But this 
Nemadi is nothing. It is a dirty people.' 

Not only were they dirty, they were a national disgrace. They 
were infidels, idiots, thieves, parasites, liars. They ate forbidden 
food. 

'And their women', he added, 'are prostitutes!' 

'But beautiful?' I suggested, if only to annoy him. 

His hand shot out from the folds of his blue robes. 

'Ha!' he wagged a finger at me. 'Now I know! Now I see it! But 
let me tell you, young Englishman, those women have terrible 
diseases. Incurable diseases!' 

'That's not what I heard,' I said. 

On our third evening together, having browbeaten him with 
the name of the Minister of the Interior, I saw signs he was 
beginning to relent. At lunch the day after, he said I was free to 
go, providing I was accompanied by a policeman, and providing 
I did nothing which might encourage them to hunt. 

'They must not hunt,' he bellowed. 'Do you hear me?' 

'I do hear you,' I said. 'But they are hunters. They were 
hunting before the time of the Prophet. What else can they do 
but hunt?' 

'Hunting', he folded his fingers sententiously, 'is forbidden by 
the law of our Republic' 

A few weeks earlier, as I was rooting through the literature on 
Sahara nomads, I had come across an account of the Nemadi, 
based on the findings of a Swiss ethnologist, which classed them 
'among the most destitute people on earth'. 

They were thought to number about three hundred and they 
would wander, in bands of thirty or so, along the edge of El 
Djouf, the Saharan Empty Quarter. The report gave them fair 
skin and blue eyes and assigned them to the eighth and lowest 
grade of Moorish society, 'Outcasts of the Wilderness': lower 
than the Harratin, who were tied, black, agricultural slaves. 

The Nemadi professed neither food taboos nor reverence for 
Islam. They ate locusts and wild honey, and wild boar if they got 
the chance. They sometimes earned a pittance from the nomads 
by selling tichtar, the dried meat of antelopes which, when 
crumbled, gives a gamey flavour to couscous. 

The men earned a little more money carving saddle-trees and 
milk-bowls from acacia wood. They insisted they were the 
rightful owners of the land, and that the Moors had stolen it 
from them. Because the Moors treated them as pariahs, they 
were forced to camp far from the town. 

As for their origins, they were possibly survivors of a 
Mesolithic hunting population. Almost certainly, they were the 
'Messoufites', one of whom — blind in one eye, half blind in the 
other - guided Ib'n Battuta across the sands in 1 3 5 7. 'The desert 
here', wrote the world traveller, 'is beautiful and brilliant, and 
the soul finds its ease. Antelopes abound. A herd often passes so 
close to our caravan that the Messoufites hunt them with 
arrows and with dogs.' 

By the 1970s, shooting parties with Land-Rovers and longrange 
rifles had made sure that the oryx and addax, far from 
being abundant, were dying out. The government called for a 
general ban on hunting, in which the Nemadi were included. 

Knowing themselves to be as gentle as the Moors were violent 
and vindictive; knowing also that it was herding which led to 
violence, the Nemadi wanted none of it. Their favourite songs 
spoke of flights into the desert where they would wait for better 
times. 

The Governor told me how he and his colleagues had bought 
the Nemadi a total of a thousand goats. 'One thousand goats!' 
he went on shouting. 'You know what that means? Many goats! 
And what did they do with those goats? Milk them? No! Ate 
them! Ate the lot! lis sont im-be-cilesV 

The policeman, I'm glad to say, liked the Nemadi. He said 
they were braves gens and, surreptitiously, that the Governor 
was off his head. 

Walking towards the white tent, we first heard the sound of 
laughter and then came on a party of twelve Nemadi, adults and 
children, resting in the shade of an acacia. They were none of 
them sick or dirty. Everyone was immaculate. 

The headman got up to welcome us. 

'Mahfould,' I said, and shook his hand. 

I knew his face from the Swiss ethnographer's photos: a flat, 
beaming face wound about with a cornflower-blue turban. He 
had hardly aged in twenty years. 

Among the party were several women in indigo cotton and a 
negro with a club foot. There was an ancient, blue-eyed cripple 
who manoeuvred himself on his hands. The chief hunter was a 
square-shouldered man whose expression spoke of rigour and 
reckless gaiety. He was whittling a saddle-tree from a block of 
wood while his favourite dog, a sleek piebald terrier not unlike a 
Jack Russell, nuzzled up against his knee. 

Nemadi means 'master of dogs'. The dogs are said to eat even 
when their owners go hungry; their training would be the pride of 
any circus. A pack consists of five: the 'king' and four followers. 

The hunter, having tracked a herd of antelopes to its grazing 
ground, will lie with his dogs on the downward scarp of a dune, 
and instruct them which animal to go for. At a signal, the 'king' 
then hurtles down the slope, fastens its teeth around the 
antelope's muzzle, and the others go for each of the legs. A 
single knife thrust, a rapid prayer to ask the antelope for its 
forgiveness — and the hunt is over. 

The Nemadi despise the use of firearms as a sacrilege. And 
since the soul of the dead beast is thought to reside in its bones, 
these are reverently buried in case the dogs defile them. 

'The antelopes were our friends,' said one of the women with 
a dazzling white smile. 'Now they have gone far away. Now we 
have nothing, nothing to do but laugh.' 

They all roared with laughter when I asked about the 
Governor's goats. 
'And if you will buy us a goat,' said the chief hunter, 'we will 
kill that also, and eat it.' 

'Right,' I said to the policeman. 'Let's go and buy them a goat.' 

We walked across the wadi to where a herdsman was 
watering his flock. I paid a little more than he asked for a 
yearling, and the hunter coaxed it back to the camp. A gurgle 
from behind a bush announced that its life had ended and there 
would be meat for supper. 

The women laughed, beat a tam-tam on some old tin basins, 
and sang a soft burbling song to thank the foreigner for the gift 
of meat. 

There is a story of a Moorish emir, who, driven to frenzy by a 
Nemadi woman's smile, kidnapped her, clothed her in silks and 
never saw her smile again until the day she spotted, through the 
lattice of her prison, a Nemadi man strolling through the 
market. To the emir's credit, he let her go. 

What, I asked the women, was the secret of their famous 
smile? 

'Meat!' they cried cheerfully, gnashing their teeth in unison. 
'Meat is what gives us our beautiful smiles. We chew the meat 
and we cannot help smiling.' 

In the little white tent, sewn from strips of Sudanese cotton, 
there lived an old woman with two dogs and a cat. Her name was 
Lemina. She was very old when the Swiss came nearly twenty 
years earlier. The policeman said she was more than a hundred. 

Tall and unstooping, in blue, she came through the thorn 
trees towards the cause of the excitement. 

Mahfould stood to greet her. She was deaf and dumb. They 
stood against the deepening sky, flicking their fingers in sign 
language. Her skin was white, like sheets of tissue paper. Her 
eyes were hooded and cloudy. Smiling, she raised her withered 
arms towards me and uttered a succession of warbling notes. 

She held the smile a full three minutes. Then she turned on her 
heels, snapped a twig from an acacia, and went back to her tent. 
Among these pale-skinned people, the negro was the odd man 
out. I asked how he had come to join the band. 

'He was alone,' said Mahfould. 'So he came with us.' 

I then learned, through the policeman, that it was possible for 
a man to join the Nemadi: a woman never. Yet, since their 
numbers were so low, and since no self-respecting outsider 
would demean himself by 'marrying down', these women 
always had their eyes open for 'fresh white blood'. 

One of the young mothers, a grave and lovely girl with a cowl 
of blue cotton over her head, was suckling a baby. She was 
married to the hunter. You would have said she was about 
twenty-five: but when I mentioned the name of the Swiss 
ethnologist, the husband grinned and, gesturing towards his 
wife, said, 'We have one of his.' 

He set aside his carpentry and whistled across to the second 
camp. A minute or two later, a lithe, bronze-skinned young man 
with glinting green eyes came striding through the bushes with a 
pair of dogs and a hunting spear. He wore a short leather breechclout. 
His hair was fair-to-reddish and cut in a kind of cockscomb. 
The instant he saw a European, he lowered his eyelids. 

He sat down in silence between his mother and foster-father. 
Anyone might mistake them for the Holy Family. 

When I came to the end of the story, Arkady made no comment, 
but stood up and said, 'We'd better get going.' We buried the 
debris and walked back to the car. 

'You may think it sounds silly,' I said, trying to pump him for a 
reaction. 'But I live with that old woman's smile.' 

The smile, I said, was like a message from the Golden Age. It 
had taught me to reject out of hand all arguments for the nastiness 
of human nature. The idea of returning to an 'original simplicity' 
was not naive or unscientific or out of touch with reality. 

'Renunciation', I said, 'even at this late date, can work.' 

'I'd agree with that,' said Arkady. 'The world, if it has a 
future, has an ascetic future.' 

IN THE POLICE STATION at Popanji, two Aboriginal girls in dirty 
floral dresses were standing before the counter swearing oaths 
before the officer in charge. They needed his official stamp 
before they could sign on for welfare. They had interrupted his 
weight-training session. 

He took the hand of the taller girl and pressed it on the Bible. 
'Right,' he said. 'Now repeat what I say, after me. I, 

Rosie . . .' 
'I, Rosie 
'Swear by Almighty God . . .' 
'Swear by Almighty God . . .' 
'That'll do,' he said. 'Now it's your turn, Myrtle.' 
The policeman reached for the other girl's hand, but she 
cringed and whipped it from his grasp. 
'Come on, sweetheart,' he said in a wheedling voice. 'No need 
to act the giddy-goat.' 
'Oh, come on, Myrtle,' said her sister. 
But Myrtle shook her head vigorously and locked her hands 
behind her back. Rosie then gently uncurled her sister's 
forefinger and tugged it towards the binding. 
'I, Myrtle . . .' said the policeman. 
'I, Myrtle . . .' she repeated, as though the words were going 
to choke her. 
'OK,' he said. 'That'll do for you.' 
He stamped their application forms and scrawled a signature 
across each. On the wall behind, there were pictures of the 
Queen and Duke of Edinburgh. Myrtle sucked her thumb and 
stared, bug-eyed, at the Queen's diamonds. 

'Now what do you want?'he asked. 
'Nothing,' said Rosie for her sister. 
The girls skipped away, past the flagstaff and across the rain
sodden lawn. It had been raining all day. They splashed on 
through puddles towards a gang of boys booting at a football. 

The policeman was short, scarlet in the face, with stumpy legs 
and almost unbelievable muscles. He was dripping with sweat, 
and his carroty curls were flattened on to his forehead. He wore 
short, ice-blue leotards with a satiny sheen. His pectoral 
muscles were so heftily developed that the shoulder-straps had 
bunched into the cleavage, leaving his nipples bare. 

'Hello there, Ark,' he said. 

'Red,' said Arkady, 'I want you to meet my friend, Bruce.' 

'Pleased to meet you, Bruce,' said Red. 

We were standing behind the plate-glass window looking out 
at the blank horizon. Water lay in sheets on the ground, 
flooding several Aboriginal humpies to the depth of a foot or 
more. The owners had heaped their gear on to the roofs. The 
water was awash with refuse. 

A short way off to the west was the old administrator's house, 
of two storeys, which had since been given over to the 
community. The roof was still on and there were floors and 
fireplaces. But the walls, the window sashes and the staircase 
had all been burnt for firewood. 

We looked through this X-ray house into the yellow sunset. 
On both upper and lower floors sat a ring of dark figures, 
warming themselves over a smoky fire. 

'They don't give a fuck for walls,' said Red, 'but they do like a 
roof for the rain.' 
Arkady told him we were on our way to Cullen. 'Little 
dispute between Titus and the Amadeus Mob.' 

'Yes,' Red nodded. 'I heard about that.' 

'Who's Titus?'I asked. 

'You'll see,' said Arkady. 'You'll see.' 

'I'll be out that way myself next week,' Red said. 'Got to go 
and look for the grader.' 

Clarence Japalj arrayi, the Chairman at Cullen, had borrowed 
the Popanji grading-machine to make a road from the settlement 
to a soakage. 

'That was nine months ago,' Red said. 'Now the fucker says 
he's lost it.' 

'Lost a grader?' Arkady laughed. 'For Christ's sakes, you 
can't lose a grader.' 

'Well, if anyone's going to lose a grader,' said Red, 'it'll be 
Clarence.' 
Arkady asked what the road was like up ahead. Red toyed 
with the buckle of his security belt. 

'You'll be all right,' he said. 'Stumpy Jones nearly got bogged 
in the big storm Thursday. But Rolf and Wendy went through 
yesterday, and they radioed this morning they'd arrived.' 

He was shifting uneasily from foot to foot. You could tell he 
was aching to get back to his weights. 

'Just one thing,' said Arkady. 'You haven't seen old Stan 
Tjakamarra? I thought we'd take him along. He's on quite good 
terms with Titus.' 

'I think Stan's gone walkabout,' Red said. 'They've been 
initiating all week. It's been a right mess, I can tell you. You ask 
Lydia.' 

Lydia was one of two school-teachers stationed here. We had 
radioed a message for her to expect us. 

'See you in a while,' Red said. 'She's cooking tonight.' 

The police post at Popanji was a low concrete building divided 
into three equal parts: a public office, the officer's private 
quarters, and the room Red used for weight-training. In the yard 
at the back there was a gaol. 

The weight-training room had a wall-to-wall window and the 
weights themselves were the same electric blue as Red's leotards. 
We watched him enter. He lay down on the bench-press and 
gripped the bar. A small boy whistled to his mates, who dropped 
their football and rushed, naked, to the window, yelling and 
making funny faces and pressing their noses to the glass. 

'One of the sights of the Territory,' said Arkady. 

'I'll say,' I said. 

'Not a bad bloke, Red,' he said. 'Likes a bit of discipline. 
Speaks Aranda and Pintupi like a native. Bit of a nut-case, really. 
I'll give you one guess what his favourite book is.' 

'I hate to think.' 

'Guess!' 

'Pumping Iron,' I said. 

'Way off.' 

'Tell me.' 

'The Ethics of Spinoza.' 

WE FOUND LYDIA in the schoolroom, trying to restore a 
semblance of order to the papers, paint pots, plastic alphabets 
and picture-books that lay scattered over the tables or trampled 
into the floor by muddy feet. She came to the doorway. 

'Oh God,' she cried. 'What am I to do?' 

She was a capable and intelligent woman in her early forties: 
a divorcee with two young boys. Her hair was grey and cut in a 
fringe above a pair of steady brown eyes. She was so capable. 
and plainly so used to rising above every crisis that she refused 
to admit, to herself or others, that her nerves were frayed to 
breaking. 

In the middle of the morning, she had gone to take a radio-call 
from her mother, who was sick in Melbourne. When she came 
back, the kids had dipped their hands into a can of green paint 
and slapped it round the walls. 

'Well, at least they didn't shit on the desks,' she said. 'This 
time!' 

Her boys, Nicky and David, were playing with their black 
friends in the schoolyard in their underpants, muddied from 
head to toe, and swinging like monkeys from the aerial roots of 
a fig tree. Nicky, frantic with excitement, shouted obscenities at 
his mother and stuck out his tongue. 

'I'm going to drown you,' she shouted back. 

She stretched her arms across the doorway, as though to 
prevent us from entering, but then said, 'Come in. Come in. I'm 
only being silly.' 

She stood in the middle of the room, paralysed by the chaos. 

'Let's have a bonfire,' she said. 'The only thing to do's to have 
a bonfire and burn the lot. Burn and begin again.' 

Arkady comforted her in the reverberative Russian voice he 
usually reserved for women, to calm them. Lydia then led us 
towards a sheet of fibreboard, on which was pinned up the work 
of the art class. 

'The boys paint horses and helicopters,' she said. 'But can I 
get them to do a house? Never! Only girls do houses .. . and 
flowers.' 

'Interesting,' said Arkady. 

'Do look at these,' she smiled. 'These are funny.' 

They were a pair of crayon drawings, one of an Emu Monster 
with atrocious claws and beak. The other was a hairy 'Ape 
Man' with a jawful of fangs and flashing yellow eyes, like 
headlights. 

'Where's Graham?' Arkady asked, suddenly. 
Graham was Lydia's assistant. He was the boy I had seen in 
Alice as I was leaving the motel. 

'Just don't speak to me about Graham,' she shuddered. 'I 
don't want to know about Graham. If anyone says the word 
"Graham" again I may do something violent.' 

She made another half-hearted effort to clear up one of the 
desks, but stopped and took a deep breath. 
'No,' she said. 'It's no use. I'd much rather face it in the 
morning.' 

She locked up, called to the boys, and made them put on their 
Space Invader t-shirts. They were bare-foot. They trailed us 
reluctantly across the compound, but since there were so many 
thorns and bits of broken glass we decided to carry them 
piggyback. 

We passed the Lutheran chapel, boarded up now for three 
years. We then passed the Community Centre: a blue-metal 
hangar on which there was painted a cartoon procession of 
honey-ants. From inside came the sound of country and western 
music. An evangelical meeting was in progress. I put David 
down and poked my head around the door. 

Onstage stood a pale Aboriginal half-caste in tight, white 
bell-bottom pants and a shiny scarlet shirt. His hairy chest 
was festooned with gold chains. His pot-belly seemed to have 
been added as an afterthought, and he was swivelling on his 
high heels doing his best to rouse a rather grumpy congregation. 

'OK,' he crooned. 'Come on now! Give it voice! Give voice to 
Je-e-e-sus!' 

The verses, projected on slides, came up one by one on to a 
screen: 

Jesus is the sweetest name I know 
And he's the same as his name 
And that's why I love him so . . . 

'Now you see', said Arkady, 'what some of us have to 
contend with.' 

'Bathos,' I said. 

Lydia and the boys lived in a shabby, prefabricated house of 
three rooms, which had been set down in the shade of an 
ironwood. She threw her briefcase on to an armchair. 

'And now', she said, 'I've got to face the kitchen sink.' 

'We've got to face it,' said Arkady. 'You've got to put your 
feet up.' 

He took some toys off the daybed and guided her feet firmly 
on to it. There were three days' dirty dishes in the kitchen and 
the ants were everywhere. We scoured the grease from 
aluminium saucepans, and boiled a kettle. I cut up some steak 
and onions for a stew. Over a second pot of tea, Lydia began to 
unwind and to talk, quite rationally, about Graham. 

Graham had come straight to Popanji from a teacher-training 
college in Canberra. He was twenty-two. He was innocent, 
intolerant, and had a smile of irresistible charm. He could turn 
quite nasty if anyone called him 'angelic'. 

He lived for music - and Pintupi boys were born musicians. 
One of his first acts, on arrival, was to start the Popanji Band. 
He scrounged the sound equipment from a moribund radiostation 
in Alice. They practised in the disused doctor's surgery, 
which still had its electric wiring intact. 

Graham took the drums for himself. There were two 
guitarists, sons of Albert Tjakamarra. The keyboard player was 
a fat boy who styled himself 'Danny Roo'. The singer, and star, 
was a whiplike sixteen-year-old, 'Long-fingers' Mick. 

Mick had his hair in rasta plaits and was a mesmerising 
mimic. After five minutes of watching a video, he could 'do' Bob 
Marley, or Hendrix or Zappa. But his best performance was to 
roll his syrupy eyes and spread his huge, pouty mouth into a grin 
- and 'become' his namesake, Jagger himself. 
Travelling and sleeping in Graham's old Volkswagen van, the 
Band toured the settlements from Yuendumu to Ernabella and 
even as far afield as Balgo. 

They sang a dirge about police killings called 'The Ballad of 
Barrow Creek'. They had an upbeat number called 'Abo Rasta': 
another, more morally uplifting, against petrol-sniffing. They 
made a tape, and then a seven-inch disc, and then they had a hit 
on their hands. 

'Grandfather's Country' became the song of the Out-Station 
Movement. Its theme was eternal, 'Go west, young man! Go 
west!' Away from cities and government camps. Away from 
drink, glue, hash, smack, gaol. Out! Back to the desert from 
which grandfather was hounded. The refrain, 'Mobs of 
people . . . Mobs of People . . .', had a slightly liturgical tone, 
like 'Bread of Heaven . . . Bread of Heaven . . .' — and drove the 
audiences wild. At the Alice Rock Festival, where they played it, 
ancient Aboriginal greybeards were seen skittering and bopping 
with the kids. 

A promoter from Sydney took Graham aside, and seduced 
him with the blather of show business. 

Graham went back to his job at Popanji, but was hardly there 
in spirit. He had visions of his music sweeping Australia and the 
rest of the world. He pictured himself starring in a 'road movie'. 
He was soon lecturing Lydia about agents, agents' fees, 
recording rights and movie rights. She heard him out in silence, 
with misgivings. 

She was — she was too honest not to admit it — jealous. She 
had mothered Graham, fed him, sewn the patches on his jeans, 
tidied his house and listened to his idealistic hot talk. 

What she loved most in him was his seriousness. He was a 
do-er: the opposite of her ex-husband, whose idea it had been to 
'work for Aboriginals' and who'd then nipped off to Bondai. 
What she dreaded, above all, was the thought that Graham 
might leave. 

To be alone, without home or money, with two boys to bring 
up, nagged with worry that the government might cut back 
funds and she be made redundant: none of that mattered as long 
as Graham was around. 

She was afraid, too, for Graham himself. He and his black 
friends would 'go bush' for days on end. She never pressed him 
for details, yet she suspected, just as she'd suspected her husband 
of heroin, that Graham was mixed up in Aboriginal 'business'. 

Eventually, he couldn't resist telling her. He described the 
dancing and singing, the blood-letting and sacred diagrams; and 
told her how he'd been painted all over, in bands of white and 
ochre. 

She warned him that Aboriginals' friendship was never 'pure'. 
They would always look on whites as a 'resource'. Once he was 
'one of them' he'd have to share everything. 

'They'll have the Volkswagen off you,' she said. 
He turned on her with a smile of amused contempt and said, 
'Do you think I'd care?' 

Her second set of fears she kept to herself. She was afraid that, 
once you joined, you joined: whether it was a secret society or a 
spy-ring, your life from then on was marked. At her previous post 
in Groote Eylandt, a young anthropologist had been given ritual 
secrets, but when he published them in his thesis, he suffered from 
headaches and depressions - and could now live only outside 
Australia. 

Lydia willed herself not to believe the stories of 'bonepointing' 
and of sorcerers who could 'sing' men to their doom. 
All the same, she had an idea that the Aboriginals, with their 
terrifying immobility, had somehow got Australia by the throat. 
There was an awesome power in these apparently passive people 
who would sit, watch, wait and manipulate the white man's guilt. 

One day, after Graham had gone missing for a week, she 
asked him, straight, 'Do you, or don't you, want to teach?' 
He folded his arms. 'I want to. Yes,' he replied with 
inconceivable insolence. 'But not in a school run by racists.' 

She gasped, wanted to block her ears, but he went on, 
mercilessly. The education programme, he said, was systematically 
trying to destroy Aboriginal culture and to rope them into the 
market system. What Aboriginals needed was land, land and 
more land - where no unauthorised European would ever set 
foot. 

He ranted on. She felt her answer rising in her throat. She knew 
she shouldn't say the words, but the words came bursting out, 'In 
South Africa they've a name for that! Apartheid!' 

Graham walked from the house. The break, from then on, 
was total. In the evenings the bam-bam-bam of the Band struck 
her as something evil and menacing. 

She could have reported him to the education authority. She 
could have had him fired. Instead, she shouldered all his work 
and taught both classes herself. Sometimes she came into the 
schoolroom and found 'Lydia loves Graham' scrawled up on 
the blackboard. 

Early one morning, as she watched the sunlight spread over 
the bedsheets, she heard Graham's voice in the front room. He 
was laughing with Nicky and David. She closed her eyes, smiled 
and dozed off again. 

Later, she heard him tinkering in the kitchen. He came in with 
a cup of tea, sat on the end of her bed, and gave her the news. 

'We've made it,', he said. 

'Grandfather's Country' was number 3 in the National Hit 
Parade. The Band was to be given star billing in Sydney, at The 
Place, all air fares and hotels paid. 
'Oh!' she said, and let her head fall back on the pillow. 'I'm 
glad. You deserve it. You do, you know. Every bit of it.' 

Graham had accepted to play the first concert in Sydney on 
February 1 5th — and in his haste to sign the contract had put all 
other considerations aside. 

He forgot - or pretended to forget - that the rains came in 
February, and that February was the month for initiations. He 
forgot his friend Mick was due to be initiated into the Bandicoot 
Clan. And he put out of his mind the fact that he, Graham, in a 
moment of bravura, had agreed to be initiated with him. 

Initiation ceremonies the world over are staged as a symbolic 
battle in which the young man — to prove his virility and 'fitness' 
for marriage — must bare his sexual organs to the jaws of a 
bloodthirsty ogre. The knife of the circumciser is a substitute for 
the carnivore's fang. In Aboriginal Australia, the puberty rites 
will also include 'head-bijiing' — at which the Elders gnaw at the 
boys' skulls or jab at them with sharpened points. Sometimes, 
the boys pull out their own fingernails and stick them back on 
with their blood. 

The ceremony takes place in secret, at a Dreaming site far 
from the eyes of strangers. Afterwards, at a seminar made 
unforgettable by pain, the sacred couplets are dinned into the 
heads of the initiates — who, meanwhile, are made to crouch 
over fires of smouldering sandalwood. The smoke is said to 
have anaesthetic properties which assist the wounds to heal. 

For a boy to delay his initiation is to risk being stranded in a 
lifeless, asexual limbo: to evade it altogether was, until recently, 
unheard of. The performance can drag on for weeks, if not 
months. 

Lydia was a little vague as to what happened. Graham, it 
seems, was frantic with worry they would miss the first concert: 
Mick made a terrible scene, and accused Graham of abandoning 
him. 

Eventually, everyone arrived at a compromise: whereby 
Graham would only suffer token 'cuts' and Mick would be 
allowed to shorten his period of isolation. He would return to 
Popanji in order to practise with the Band, but would have to 
spend several hours each day in session with the Elders. He also 
promised not to leave until two days before the concert. 

At first, everything went without a hitch and, on February 
7th, as soon as Mick was fit to walk, he and Graham returned to 
the settlement. The weather was damp and sultry, and Mick 
insisted on rehearsing in a pair of skin-tight blue jeans. On the 
night of February 9 th, he woke from a nightmare to find the 
wound had gone horribly septic. 

Graham then panicked. He bundled all the sound equipment 
and the players into the Volkswagen and, before dawn, drove 
off to Alice. 

Lydia got up that morning to find the house surrounded by a 
furious mob, some waving spears, accusing her of hiding the 
fugitives or helping them escape. Two carloads of men gave 
chase — in order to fetch Mick back. 

I told Lydia I'd seen Graham, looking more or less demented, 
outside the motel. 

'What can one do,' she said, 'except see the funny side of it?' 

W E WERE ON THE ROAD by eight, under a blanket of lowhanging 
cloud. The road streaked ahead in two parallel 
ruts of reddish water. In places we had to cross a floodpan with 
low bushes breaking the surface. A cormorant flew up ahead 
of us, thrashing the water with its wings. We passed through 
a stand of desert oaks, which are a species of casuarina and 
look less like an oak than a cactus. They, too, were standing in 
water. Arkady said it was madness to go on, but we went on. 
The muddy water splashed up inside the cab. I gritted my teeth 
whenever the wheels began to spin, but then we would again 
lurch forward. 

'The nearest I came to drowning', I said, 'was in a flashflood 
in the Sahara.' 
Around noon we sighted Stumpy Jones's truck. He was 
coming back from Cullen, from delivering the weekly supplies. 

He braked and leaned out of the cab. 

'Hi, Ark,' he called. 'Want a shot of Scotch?' 

'Wouldn't say no.' 

He handed down the bottle. We each took a couple of swigs 
and handed it back. 
'Hear you got a date with Titus?' said Stumpy. 
'Yes.' 
'Best of luck.' 
'He is there, I hope?' 
'Oh, he'll be there all right.' 
Stumpy Jones was a grizzled, green-eyed man with enormous 

biceps and a 'bit of the black in him'. He was wearing a red plaid 
shirt. The left half of his face was yellowish scar tissue. On the 
trailer he was carrying a caravan which was being sent for 
modernisation in Alice. He got out to check his lashings. His 
legs were so extraordinarily short that he swung himself from 
the door-frame on one hand, and lowered himself gently to the 
ground. 

'Happy landings,' he waved to us. 'You're over the worst.' 

We moved ahead, through what seemed to be an endless lake. 

'What happened to his face?' I asked. 

'Bitten by a king-brown,' said Arkady. 'About four years 
back. He got down to change a wheel and the bugger'd wrapped 
itself around the axle. He got over that one and the thing went 
cancerous.' 

'Christ!' I said. 

'Stumpy's indestructible.' 

A couple of hours later, we saw a herd of camels, soaked in 
the downpour, and then through the mist we began to see the 
rounded hump of Mount Cullen, rearing up above the level of 
the plain. As we came up closer, the colour of the mountain 
turned from grey to purple: the colour of sodden red sandstone. 
A mile or two beyond, there was an escarpment of sheer, faceted 
cliffs, upraised into a peak at one end, and then tapering away 
towards the north. 

This, said Arkady, was Mount Liebler. 
On a saddle between these two mountains lay the settlement 
of Cullen. 

We drove along the airstrip, past the caravans of the white 
advisers, towards a building of galvanised sheet. There was a 
petrol pump outside it. The sun had come out and it was hot and 
sticky. Packs of dogs were squabbling over a few scraps of offal. 
There was no one about. 

Dispersed among the bushes were a number of humpies, but 
most of the Pintupi preferred to live in windbreaks of thorn. A 
few bits of washing were hanging out to dry. 

'Who would guess', said Arkady, 'that this is a flourishing 
community of four hundred souls?' 

'Not me,' I said. 

The store was locked. 

'We'd better go and rout out Rolf.' 

'Who is this Rolf ?' 

'Rolf Niehart,'he said.'You'll see.' 

He pointed the Land Cruiser towards a caravan set in some 
trees. There was a generator purring in a shed alongside. 
Arkady sidestepped the puddles and rapped on the door. 
'Rolf?' he called. 

'Who's that?' someone answered in a sleepy voice. 

'Ark!' 

'Ha! The Great Do-Gooder himself!' 

'That'll do.' 

'Your humble servant.' 

. 'Open up.' 

'Clothed or unclothed?' 

'Clothed, you little monster!' 

After a few moments of rummaging about, Rolf appeared at 
the caravan door, scrubbed and immaculate, like someone off the 
beach in St Tropez, in cut-off jeans and a striped French sailor's 
shirt. He was built on a minuscule scale, and can't have been more 
than four foot ten. He had a prominent bridge to his nose, but 
what was so arresting was the colour scheme: uniform amber — 
golden, sandy amber - the eyes steady and mocking; the hair en 
brosse, very French; the skin tanned, oiled, unlined, without a 
pimple or blemish anywhere. And when he opened his mouth, he 
displayed a set of glittering triangular teeth, like a baby shark's. 

He was the store manager. 

'Enter,' he said, ceremoniously. 

Inside the caravan, you could hardly move for books: novels 
mostly, in shelves and in stacks; hardback and paperback; 
English and American novels; novels in French and German; 
from the Czech, the Spanish, the Russian; unopened packages 
from the Gotham Book Mart; heaps of the Nouvelle Revue 
Franqaise and the New York Review; literary journals; journals 
of literature in translation, dossiers, files, card indexes . . . 

'Sit!' he said, as if there was anywhere to sit until we'd 
cleared a space. 

By the time we had done so, Rolf had poured three cups of 
coffee from the espresso machine, lit himself a Gauloise, and was 
holding forth, in a staccato rat-tat-tat, against the whole of 
contemporary fiction. One after the other, the big names were set 
up on the block of this literary executioner, played with, and put 
down with a single syllable, 'Shit!' 

The Americans were 'bores'. The Australians were 'infantile'. 
The South Americans were 'over'. London was a 'cesspit', Paris 
not much better. The only half-decent work was being done in 
Eastern Europe. 

'Providing', he snapped, 'they stay there!' 

He next turned his venom on to publishers and agents until 
Arkady could take it no longer. 
'Look, little monster. We are tired.' 
'You look tired,' he said. 'You also look filthy.' 
'Where are we going to sleep?' 
'In a lovely, air-conditioned caravan.' 
'Whose caravan?' 
'Put specially at your disposal by the Cullen Community. With 
clean sheets on the beds, cool drinks in the fridge . . .' 

'I said whose caravan?' 

'Glen's,' he said. 'He hasn't moved into it yet.' 

Glen was a community adviser. 

'So where's Glen?' 

'In Canberra,' said Rolf. 'For a conference. Silly ponce!' 

He nipped outside, jumped into the Land Cruiser and headed 
us towards a brand-new, smartly painted caravan a few hundred 
yards away. Hanging from the branch of a ghost-gum, there was 
a canvas bucket-shower, with two water containers under it. 

Rolf lifted the lid of one and dipped his finger in. 

'Still warm,' he said. 'We were expecting you earlier.' 

He handed Arkady the key. Inside the caravan there was soap, 
there were towels, there were sheets. 
'I'll leave you to it,' he said. 'Look over at the store a bit later. 
We close at five.' 

'How's Wendy?' Arkady asked. 

'In love with me,' Rolf grinned. 

'Monkey!' 

Arkady raised his fist as if to cuff him, but Rolf jumped down 
the steps and strolled off, inconsequentially, through the bushes. 
'That one needs some explaining,' I said. 
'It's what I always tell people,' said Arkady. 'Australia is a land 
of wonders.' 

'For a start,' I said, 'how old is he?' 

'Anything from nine to ninety.' 

We showered, changed, put our feet up and then Arkady 
outlined what he knew of Rolf's background. 

He belonged, on his father's side, to a lineage of Barossa Valley 
Germans - eight generations of Prussians, solid Lutheran with 
solid money, the most rooted community in Australia. The 
mother was a Frenchwoman who had landed up in Adelaide 
during the war. Rolf was trilingual, in English, German and 
French. He got a grant to go to the Sorbonne. He wrote a thesis 
on 'structural linguistics' and later had a job as 'cultural 
correspondent' for a Sydney newspaper. 

This experience gave him so rabid a hatred for the press, 
press-lords and the media in general that, when his girlfriend 
Wendy suggested they maroon themselves at Cullen, he agreed 
on one condition: he'd have as much time as he liked to read. 

'And Wendy?'I asked. 
'Oh, she's a serious linguist. She's collecting material for the 
Pintupi dictionary.' 
By the end of the first year, he went on, Rolf had read himself 
to a standstill when the job of storekeeper came up. 

The previous storekeeper, another lunatic called Bruce, 
believing himself more Aboriginal than the Aboriginals, made 
the mistake of picking a quarrel with an unhinged old man 
called Wally Tjangapati, and had his skull split open by Wally's 
boomerang. 

Unfortunately, a splinter of mulga wood, needle-thin or 
thinner, escaped the eyes of the X-ray operator in Alice Springs, 
and made a traverse through Bruce's brain. 

'Affecting', said Arkady, 'not only his speech but his lower 
bodily functions.' 

'Why did Rolf take it on?' 

'Perversity,' he said. 

'What does he do with himself?' Tasked. 'Does he write?' 

Arkady frowned. 

'I wouldn't mention that,' he said. 'I think it's a sore subject. I 
think he had his novel turned down.' 

We had an hour's siesta and then walked over to the 
dispensary, where the radio-telephone was. Estrella, the Spanish 
nursing sister, was bandaging a woman whose leg had been 
bitten by a dog. On the roof of the dispensary, several 
galvanised sheets had worked loose and were clattering up and 
down in the wind. 

Arkady asked if there'd been any messages. 

'No,' Estrella yelled above the diri. 'I don't hear nothing.' 

'Any messages?' Arkady bellowed, pointing at the radio. 

'No. No. No messages!' 

'The first thing I'm going to do tomorrow', I said as we 
walked away, 'is to fix that roof.' 

We walked towards the store. 

Because Stumpy Jones had brought a consignment of melons 

— rock-melons and water-melons - about fifty people were 
squatting or sitting around the petrol-pump, eating melon. 

The dogs were disgusted by melon rind. 

We went inside. 

The lights of the store had fused and the shoppers were 
groping about in semi-darkness. Some were ferreting in the 
deep-freeze. Someone had spilt a bag of flour. A child was 
howling for a lost lolly, and a young mother, her baby cinched 
inside her scarlet jumper, was taking swigs from a tomato-sauce 
bottle. 

The 'mad boomeranger', a gaunt, hairless man with rings of 
fat around his neck, stood in front of the till, angrily demanding 
cash for his welfare cheque. 

There were two cash registers. One was manually operated; 
the other was electric and therefore out of order. Behind the first 
one, an Aboriginal girl sat totting up the bills with deft-fingered 
competence. Behind the second, head down, oblivious to the 
noise and the stink, was Rolf. 

He was reading. 
He looked up and said, 'Oh, there you are!' He was reading 
Proust. 
'I'm about to shut,' he said. 'Need anything? We got a great 

line in coconut shampoo.' 

'No,' I said. 

He was, to be precise, nearing the end of the Duchesse de 
Guermantes's interminable dinner party. His head swayed 
from side to side as his eyes ran across the page. Then, with the 
satisfaction of concluding a Proustian paragraph, he let out an 
involuntary 'Ah!', inserted the bookmark and slapped the 
Pleiade shut. 

He jumped to his feet. 

'Out!' he barked at the shoppers. 'Out! Out! Scram!' 

He allowed the. women already standing in line to complete 

their purchases. All other customers, even the 'boomeranger', 
he sent packing for the door. With a moan of anguish, the young 
mother shielded her basket from him. He was unrepentant. 

'Out!' he repeated. 'You've had all day. Come back at nine 
tomorrow.' 

He grabbed the basket and returned her tins of ham and 
pineapple to the shelves. Finally, when he had shoved the last 
customer through the door, he pointed to an 'Eski' hidden 
behind his cash till. 

'Hardship rations,' he said. 'Courtesy of Stumpy Jones. Come 
on, you two big thugs. Give us a hand.' 
He allowed Arkady and me to carry the container to his 
caravan. Wendy had not yet come back. 

'See you later,' he nodded. 'Eight sharp.' 

We read for a couple of hours, and at eight sharp walked 
across to find Rolf and Wendy grilling chicken over a charcoal 
fire. There were sweet-potatoes baking in silver-foil. There were 
greens and salad. And in defiance of the regulations, there were 
four bottles of ice-cold Barossa Valley 'Chablis'. 

The moment I set eyes on Wendy I could hear myself saying, 
'Not another one!' Not another of these astonishing women! 
She was tall, calm, serious yet amused, with golden hair done up 
in braids. She seemed less demonstrative than Marian, but less 
highly strung, happier in her work, less 'lost'. 

'I'm glad you've come,' she said. 'Rolf badly needs someone 
to talk to.' 

TITUS TJILKAMATA, the man Arkady had come to see, lived 
about twenty-five miles south-west of Cullen settlement, in a 
shanty beside a soakage. 

Apparently he was in such a foul mood that Arkady, who had 
been bracing himself for the ordeal, suggested I stay behind 
until he'd 'taken the temperature'. He enlisted the support of 
Titus's 'manager', a soft-spoken man with a limp and the 
nickname 'Limpy'. The two of them set off in the Land Cruiser 
at nine. 

The day was very hot and windy and there were scribbles of 
cirrus blowing across the sky. I walked over to the dispensary. 
The noise from the roof was deafening. 

'They fix-ed it once,' Estrella yelled. 'Costed two thousand 
dollars! Imagine!' She was a tiny young woman with a very 
humorous face. 

I climbed up to inspect the damage. The job had been 
hopelessly botched. All the roof timbers were askew: in the not 
unforeseeable future, the building was going to collapse! 

Estrella sent me over to Don, the works manager, to ask him 
for a hammer and roofing nails. 'None of your business,' he 
said. 'Or mine.' 

The work had been done by some 'shit-artist' from Alice. 

'That doesn't lessen the risk', I said, facetiously, 'of one 
suicidal Spanish nun. Or a child cut in two when a sheet blows 
off.' 

Don relented with bad grace and gave me all the nails he had. 
I spent a couple of hours hammering down the sheets and, when 
the job was done, Estrella smiled, with approval. 

'At leasted I can hear myself think now,' she said. 

On my way back from returning the hammer, I looked in on 
Rolf at the store. 

Nearby, sheltering from the wind behind a ring of empty 
drums, a party of men and women were playing poker for very 
high stakes. A man had lost 1,400 dollars and was resigned to 
losing more. The winner, a giantess in a yellow jumper, was 
slapping her cards on to the groundsheets with the droopmouthed, 
hungry expression of ladies at a casino. 

Rolf was still reading Proust. He had left the Duchesse de 
Guermantes's dinner party and was following the Baron de 
Charlus through the streets to his apartment. He had a Thermos 
of black coffee, which he shared with me. 

'I've got someone here you should meet,' he said. 

He handed a toffee to a small boy and told him to run and 
fetch Joshua. About ten minutes later, a middle-aged man 
appeared in the doorway, all leg and less body, very darkskinned 
in a black cowboy hat. 

'Ha!' said Rolf. 'Mr Wayne himself.' 

'Boss!' said the Aboriginal, in a gravelly American accent. 

'Listen, you old scrounger. This is a friend of mine from 
England. I want you to tell him about the Dreamings.' 
'Boss!' he repeated. 
Joshua was a famous Pintupi 'performer', who could always 
be counted on to give a good show. He had performed in Europe 
and the United States. On flying into Sydney for the first time, he 
mistook the ground lights for stars - and asked why the plane 
was flying upside down. 

I followed him home along a winding path through the 
spinifex. He had no hips to speak of, and his pants kept falling 
down to-reveal a pair of neat, calloused buttocks. 

'Home' lay on the highest point of the saddle between Mount 
Cullen and Mount Liebler. It consisted of a gutted stationwagon 
which Joshua had rolled on to its roof so he could lie 
under the bonnet, in the shade. The cab was wrapped in black 
plastic sheet. A bundle of hunting spears poked out from one 
window. 

We sat down cross-legged in the sand. I asked him if he'd 
mind pointing out some local Dreamings. 
'Ho! Ho!' he broke into a wheezy cackle. 'Many Dreamings! 

Many!' 

'Well, who -', I asked, waving towards Mount Liebler, 'who 
is that?' 

'Ho! Ho!' he said. 'That one a Big One. A Walk One. A 
Perenty One.' 

The perenty, or lace-monitor, is the largest lizard in Australia. 
It can reach a length of eight feet or more, and has a burst of 
speed to run down a horse. 

Joshua stuck his tongue in and out like a lizard's and, twisting 
his fingers into claws, dug them crabwise into the sand to 
imitate the perenty's walk. 

I looked up again at the cliffline of Mount Liebler and found I 
could 'read' into the rock the lizard's flat, triangular head, his 
shoulder, his foreleg and hindleg, and the tail tapering away 
towards the north. 

'Yes,' I said. 'I see him. So where was this Perenty Man 
coming from?' 
'Come long way,' said Joshua. 'Come long, long way. Some 
way up Kimberley.' 

'And where's he going on to?' 

He raised his hand towards the south, 'Out that country 
people.' 

Having established that the Perenty Songline followed a 
north-south axis, I then swivelled round and pointed to Mount 
Cullen. 

'OK,' I said. 'Who's this one?' 

'Women,' Joshua whispered. 'Two women.' 

He told the story of how the Two Women had chased Perenty 
up and down the country until, at last, they cornered him here 
and attacked his head with digging-sticks. Perenty, however, 
had dug himself into the earth, and escaped. A hole on the 
summit of Mount Liebler, like a meteorite crater, was all that 
remained of the head wound. 

South of Cullen the country was green after the storms. There 
were isolated rocks jutting out of the plain like islands. 

'Tell me, Joshua,' I asked, 'who are those rocks over there?' 

Joshua listed Fire, Spider, Wind, Grass, Porcupine, Snake, 
Old Man, Two Men and an unidentifiable animal 'like a dog but 
a white one'. His own Dreaming, the Porcupine (or echidna), 
came down from the direction of Arnhem Land, through Cullen 
itself and on towards Kalgoorlie. 

I looked back again towards the settlement, at the metal roofs 
and the spinning sails of the wind-pump. 

'So Porcupine's coming up this way?' I said. 

'Same one, Boss,' Joshua smiled. 'You seeing him good.' 

He traced the line of the Porcupine track across the airstrip, 
past the school and the pump, then on along the foot of the 
Perenty cliff before it swooped down on to the plain. 
'Can you sing him for me?' I asked. 'Can you sing him coming 
up this way?' 

He glanced round to make sure no one was in earshot and 
then, in his chesty voice, sang a number of Porcupine couplets, 
keeping time by flicking his fingernail against a piece of 
cardboard sheet. 

'Thank you,' I said. 

'Boss.' 

'Tell me another story,' I said. 

'You like them stories?' 

'I like them.' 

'OK, Boss!' he tilted his head from side to side. 'Story 'bout 
the Big Fly One.' 
'Dragonfly?' I asked. 
'Bigger one.' 
'Bird?' 
'Bigger.' 
Aboriginals, when tracing a Songline in the sand, will draw a 

series of lines with circles in between. The line represents a stage 
in the Ancestor's journey (usually a day's march). Each circle is 
a 'stop', 'waterhole', or one of the Ancestor's campsites. But the 
story of the Big Fly One was beyond me. 

It began with a few straight sweeps; then it wound into a 
rectangular maze, and finally ended in a series of wiggles. As he 
traced each section, Joshua kept calling a refrain, in English, 
'Ho! Ho! They got the money over there.' 

I must have been very dim-witted that morning: it took me 
ages to realise that this was a Qantas Dreaming. Joshua had 
once flown into London. The 'maze' was London Airport: the 
Arrival gate, Health, Immigration, Customs, and then the ride 
into the city on the Underground. The 'wiggles' were the twists 
and turns of the taxi, from the tube station to the hotel. 

In London, Joshua had seen all the usual sights - the Tower of 
London, Changing of the Guard and so on — but his real 
destination had been Amsterdam. 

The ideogram for Amsterdam was even more perplexing. 
There was a circle. There were four smaller circles around it: 
and there were wires from each of these circles which led to a 
rectangular box. 

Eventually, it dawned on me that this was some kind of 
round-table conference at which he, Joshua, had been one of 
four participants. The others, in a clockwise direction, had been 
'a white one, a Father one', 'a thin one, a red one', 'a black one, a 
fat one'. 

I asked if the 'wires' were microphone cables; Joshua shook 
his head vigorously. He knew all about microphones. They had 
microphones, on the table. 

'No! No!' he shouted, pointing his fingers at his temples. 

'Were they electrodes or something?' 

'Hey!'he cackled.'You got him.' 

The picture I pieced together—true or false I can't begin to say 

- was of a 'scientific' experiment at which an Aboriginal had 
sung his Dreaming, a Catholic monk had sung the Gregorian 
Chant, a Tibetan lama had sung his mantras, and an African 
had sung whatever: all four of them singing their heads off, to 
test the effect of different song styles on the rhythmic structure 
of the brain. 
The episode struck Joshua, in retrospect, as so unbelievably 
funny that he had to hold his stomach for laughing. 

So did I. 

We laughed ourselves into hysterics and lay gasping for 
breath on the sand. 
Weak from laughter, I got to my feet. I thanked him, and said 

goodbye. 

He grinned. 

'Couldn't you buy a man a drink?' he growled in his John 

Wayne accent. 
'Not at Cullen,' I said. 

3° 

ARKADY CAME BACK in the late afternoon, tired and worried. He 
showered, wrote up some notes and lay on his bunk. The visit to 
Titus had not gone well. No, that is not true. He and Titus had 
got on very well, but what Titus had to tell him was a depressing 
story. 

Titus's father was Pintupi, his mother was Loritja, and he was 
forty-seven or forty-eight years old. He had been born not far 
from his shanty, but around 1942 — attracted by the white 
man's jam, tea and flour — his parents had migrated out of the 
desert and taken refuge at the Lutheran Mission on Horn River. 
The pastors recognised in Titus a child of outstanding intelligence, 
and took him for education. 

Even as late as the 1950s, the Lutherans ran their schools on 
the lines of a Prussian academy — and Titus was a model pupil. 
There are pictures of him at his desk, his hair neatly parted, in 
grey flannel shorts and spit-and-polished shoes. He learned to 
speak fluent English and German. He learned calculus. He 
mastered all kinds of mechanical skills. As a young lay preacher, 
he once astonished his teachers by delivering a sermon, in 
German, on the theological consequences of the Edict of 
Worms. 

Twice a year, in June and again in November, he would get 
out his double-breasted suit, board the train for Adelaide, and 
spend a few weeks catching up with modern life. In the Public 
Library he would read back-numbers of Scientific American. 
One year, he took a course in petrochemical technology. 

The 'other' Titus was the ultra-conservative song-man who 
lived, half-naked, with his dependants and his dogs; who 
hunted with a spear and never a rifle; who spoke six or seven 
Aboriginal languages and was famous, up and down the 
Western Desert, for his judgments on tribal law. 


To have the stamina to keep both systems going was proof—if 
proof were lacking — of an incredible vitality. 

Titus had welcomed the Land Rights Act as a chance for his 
people to go back to their country - and their only hope of 
getting rid of alcoholism. He detested the activities of the 
mining companies. 

Under the Act, the government reserved the right to all 
minerals under the ground and to grant licences for prospecting. 
Yet the companies, if they wished to make soundings in 
Aboriginal country, were at least obliged to consult the 'traditional 
owners' and, if mining operations started, to pay them a 
royalty. 

Titus, after weighing the pros and cons, took the line that 
money from minerals was bad money — bad for whites and bad 
for blacks. It had corrupted Australia and given it false values 
and false standards of living. When a company got permission 
to put seismic lines through his country, he gave them the 
scorn of his passive non-co-operation. 

This attitude was not calculated to win him friends, either 
among white businessmen or ambitious blacks in Alice. It was 
also the reason for the present dispute. 

Around 1910 Titus's grandfather, in dealings with a Loritja 
clan who, now living on the Amadeus Mission, call themselves 
the Amadeus Mob, had exchanged two sets of unmarked 
tjuringas. The exchange gave each the right of access to the 
other's hunting ground. Since the tjuringas had never been 
returned, the agreement was still in force. 

One day, at a time when the mining company despaired of 
dealing with Titus, a deputation from Amadeus turned up in 
Alice to say that they, not he, were the 'owners' of the 
country and its songs - and were therefore entitled to mining 
royalties. What they had done was to tamper with the tjuringas; 
engraving them with their own totemic designs. They 
had, in other words, forged the title deeds to Titus's birthright. 


Titus, who knew of Arkady by reputation only, had sent a 
message for help. 

Arkady, at his briefing in Alice, had been assured that this was 
simply a squabble about money. But Titus, it turned out, didn't 
give a hoot for money. The crisis was much more dangerous 
since, by altering the tj uringas, the Amadeus Mob had attempted 
to re-write the Creation. 
Titus told Arkady how, at nights, he heard his Ancestors 
howling for vengeance — and how he felt forced to obey them. 

Arkady, for his part, realised the urgency of getting the 
offenders to 'withdraw' their sacrilege, but could only think of 
playing for time. He suggested Titus take a holiday in Alice. 
'No,' said Titus, grimly, 'I'll stay.' 

'Then promise me one thing,' Arkady said. 'Do nothing until I 
get back to you.' 

'I promise.' 

Arkady was sure he meant to keep the promise; but what he 
found so shocking was the idea that, from now on, Aboriginals 
themselves were going to twist their own law in order to line 
their pockets. 

'And if that's going to be the future,' he said, 'I might as well 
give up.' 

That evening Estrella insisted on cooking an 'estofado for the 
roofing man', and while we were waiting in her caravan we 
heard a few pecks of rain on the roof. I looked out to see, 
hanging over Mount Liebler, a solid barrage of cloud with bolts 
of lightning fizzling at the edges. 

A few minutes later, the storm broke in sheets of water. 

'Christ,' said Arkady, 'we'll be bogged in here for weeks.' 

'I'd like that,' I said. 

'Would you?' he snapped. 'I wouldn't.' 

First, there was the Titus business to attend to. Then there 
was Hanlon. Then Arkady was due in Darwin in four days' time 
for a meeting with the railway engineer. 

'You never told me,' I said. 

'You never asked.' 

The trip-switch of the generator then failed, and we were left 
in semi-darkness. The rain slammed down for half an hour or 
so, and stopped as abruptly as it started. 

I went outside. 'Ark,' I called, 'you must come out.' 

A pair of rainbows hung across the valley between the two 
mountains. The cliffs of the escarpment, which had been a dry 
red, were now purplish-black and striped, like a zebra, with 
vertical chutes of white water. The cloud seemed even denser 
than the earth, and, beneath its lower rim, the last of the sun 
broke through, flooding the spinifex with shafts of pale green 
light. 

'I know,' said Arkady. 'Like nowhere else in the world.' 

It poured again in the night. Next morning, before light, he 
shook me awake. 
'We've got to get going,' he said. 'Quick.' 
He had listened to the weather forecast. There was worse 
weather on the way. 

'Must we?' I said, sleepily. 

'I must,' he said. 'You stay, if you want.' 

'No,' I said. 'I'll come.' 

We had tea and tidied the caravan. We wiped the mud 
stains from the floor and scribbled a note for Wendy and 
Rolf. 

We drove off through the puddles along the airstrip and 
joined the road that comes from Lake Mackay. The dawn was 
murky and sunless. We came off a ridge of higher ground . . . 
and the road disappeared into a lake. 

'Well, that', said Arkady, 'is that.' 
It was pouring by the time we got back to Cullen. Rolf was 
standing outside the store, in a rainproof poncho. 
'Ha!' he leered at me. 'Thought you could sneak off without 
saying goodbye? I haven't done with you. Yet!' 

Arkady spent the rest of the morning on the radio. The 
reception was terrible. All the roads to Alice were closed and 
would be for at least ten days. There were two seats on the mail 
plane — if the pilot would only make a detour. 

Around noon there was a message that the plane would try to 
land. 

'You coming?' said Arkady. 

'No,' I said. 'I'll stay.' 

'Good for you,' he said. 'Make sure the kids don't monkey 
around with the Land Cruiser.' He parked the vehicle under the 
trees, by our caravan, and handed me the key. 

At the dispensary, Estrella had a woman in agony with an 
abscess. She would have to go to hospital in Alice, and would 
have to have my seat on the plane. 

Another storm seemed to be brewing behind Mount Liebler 
when the crowd began waving at a black speck coming from the 
south. The Cessna splashed down on to the runway, spattering 
the fuselage with mud, and taxied towards the store. 

'Get a fuckin' move on,' the pilot bawled from the cockpit. 

Arkady gripped my hand. 'See you, mate,' he said. 'About ten 
days, if all goes well.' 
'See you,' I said. 
'Bye 'bye, Little Monster,' he said to Rolf, and escorted the 
moaning woman to the plane. 

They took off, easing out of the valley just ahead of the 
incoming storm. 
'How does it feel', Rolf asked, 'to be stuck here with me?' 
'I'll survive.' 
For lunch we had beer and a salami sandwich. The beer made 
me sleepy, so I slept until four. When I woke, I started 
rearranging the caravan as a place to work in. 

There was a plyboard top which pulled out over the second 
bunk to make a desk. There was even a swivelling office chair. I 
put my pencils in a tumbler and my Swiss Army knife beside 
them. I unpacked some exercise pads and, with the obsessive 
neatness that goes with the beginning of a project, I made three 
neat stacks of my 'Paris' notebooks. 

In France, these notebooks are known as carnets moleskines: 
'moleskine', in this case, being its black oilcloth binding. Each 
time I went to Paris, I would buy a fresh supply from a papeterie 
in the Rue de l'Ancienne Comedie. The pages were squared and 
the end-papers held in place with an elastic band. I had 
numbered them in series. I wrote my name and address on the 
front page, offering a reward to the finder. To lose a passport 
was the least of one's worries: to lose a notebook was a 
catastrophe. 

In twenty odd years of travel, I lost only two. One vanished 
on an Afghan bus. The other was filched by the Brazilian secret 
police, who, with a certain clairvoyance, imagined that some 
lines I had written - about the wounds of a Baroque Christ were 
a description, in code, of their own work on political 
prisoners. 

Some months before I left for Australia, the owner of the 
papeterie said that the vrai moleskine was getting harder and 
harder to get. There was one supplier: a small family business in 
Tours. They were very slow in answering letters. 

'I'd like to order a hundred,' I said to Madame. 'A hundred 
will last me a lifetime.' 

She promised to telephone Tours at once, that afternoon. 

At lunchtime, I had a sobering experience. The headwaiter of 
Brasserie Lipp no longer recognised me, 'Non, Monsieur, il n'y 
a pas de place.' At five, I kept my appointment with Madame. 
The manufacturer had died. His heirs had sold the business. She 
removed her spectacles and, almost with an air of mourning, 
said, 'Le vrai moleskine n'est plus.' 

I had a presentiment that the 'travelling' phase of my life might 
be passing. I felt, before the malaise of settlement crept over me, 
that I should reopen those notebooks. I should set down on 
paper a resume of the ideas, quotations and encounters which 
had amused and obsessed me; and which I hoped would shed 
light on what is, for me, the question of questions: the nature of 
human restlessness. 

Pascal, in one of his gloomier pensees, gave it as his opinion 
that all our miseries stemmed from a single cause: our inability 
to remain quietly in a room. 

Why, he asked, must a man with sufficient to live on feel 
drawn to divert himself on long sea voyages? To dwell in 
another town? To go off in search of a peppercorn? Or go off to 
war and break skulls? 

Later, on further reflection, having discovered the cause of 
our misfortunes, he wished to understand the reason for 
them, he found one very good reason: namely, the natural 
unhappiness of our weak mortal condition; so unhappy that 
when we gave to it all our attention, nothing could console 
us. 

One thing alone could alleviate our despair, and that was 
'distraction' (divertissement): yet this was the worst of our 
misfortunes, for in distraction we were prevented from thinking 
about ourselves and were gradually brought to ruin. 

Could it be, I wondered, that our need for distraction, our 
mania for the new, was, in essence, an instinctive migratory 
urge akin to that of birds in autumn? 

All the Great Teachers have preached that Man, originally, 
was a 'wanderer in the scorching and barren wilderness of this 
world' — the words are those of Dostoevsky's Grand Inquisitor 
— and that to rediscover his humanity, he must slough off 
attachments and take to the road. 
My two most recent notebooks were crammed with jottings 
taken in South Africa, where I had examined, at first hand, 
certain evidence on the origin of our species. What I learned 
there — together with what I now knew about the Songlines — 
seemed to confirm the conjecture I had toyed with for so long: 
that Natural Selection has designed us - from the structure of 
our brain-cells to the structure of our big toe — for a career of 
seasonal journeys on foot through a blistering land of thornscrub 
or desert. 

If this were so; if the desert were 'home'; if our instincts were 
forged in the desert; to survive the rigours of the desert — then it 
is easier to understand why greener pastures pall on us; why 
possessions exhaust us, and why Pascal's imaginary man found 
his comfortable lodgings a prison. 

FROM THE NOTEBOOKS 

OUR NATURE LIES in movement; complete calm is death. 
Pascal, Pensees 

A study of the Great Malady; horror of home. 
Baudelaire, Journaux Intimes 

The most convincing analysts of restlessness were often men 
who, for one reason or another, were immobilised: Pascal by 
stomach ailments and migraines, Baudelaire by drugs, St John 
of the Cross by the bars of his cell. There are French critics 
who would claim that Proust, the hermit of the cork-lined 
room, was the greatest of literary voyagers. 

The founders of monastic rule were forever devising techniques 
for quelling wanderlust in their novices. 'A monk out of his cell,' 
said St Anthony, 'is like a fish out of water.' Yet Christ and the 
Apostles walked their journeys through the hills of Palestine. 

What is this strange madness, Petrarch asked of his young 
secretary, this mania for sleeping each night in a different bed? 

What am I doing here? 
Rimbaud writing home from Ethiopia 

Picos, Piaui, Brazil 

Sleepless night in the Charm Hotel. The sleeping-sickness bug 
is endemic to this region, which has one of the highest infantmortality 
rates in the world. At breakfast-time, the proprietor, 
instead of serving my eggs, thwacked his fly-swat on to my 
plate and removed a mottled brown insect by the leg. 

'Mata gente,' he said gloomily. 'It kills people.' 

The stucco fagade is painted a pale mint green with the words 
CHARM HOTEL in bold black letters. A leaking gutter pipe has 
washed away the letter C, so that it now reads . . . 

Djang, Cameroon 

There are two hotels in Djang: the Hotel Windsor and, across 
the street, the Hotel Anti-Windsor. 

British Embassy, Kabul, Afghanistan 

The Third Secretary is also Cultural Attache. His office is stacked 
with copies of Orwell's Animal Farm: the British government's 
contribution to the teaching of English in Afghan schools and 
an elementary lesson on the evils of Marxism, as voiced through 
the mouth of a pig. 

'But pigs?' I said. 'In an Islamic country? Don't you think 
that kind of propaganda might backfire?' 
The Cultural Attache shrugged. The Ambassador thought it 
was a good idea. There was nothing he could do. 

He who does not travel does not know the value of men. 
Moorish proverb 

Miami, Florida 

On the bus from Downtown to the Beach there was a lady in 
pink. She must have been eighty, at least. She had bright pink 
hair with pink flowers in it, a matching pink dress, pink lips, 
pink nails, pink handbag, pink earrings, and, in her shoppingbasket, 
there were boxes of pink Kleenex. 
In the wedges of her clear plastic heels a pair of goldfish 
were lazily floating in formaldehyde. 
I was too intent on the goldfish to notice the midget in hornrimmed 
glasses who was standing on the seat beside me. 
'Permit me to ask you, sir,' he asked in a squeaky voice, 
'which of the human qualities do you value the most?' 

'I haven't thought,' I said. 

'I used to believe in empathy,' he said, 'but I have recently 
moved over to compassion.' 
'I'm glad to hear it.' 
'Permit me to ask you, sir? At which of the professions are 
you presently engaged?' 

'I'm studying to be an archaeologist.' 

'You amaze me, sir. I'm in that line of country myself.' 

He was a sewer-rat. His friends would lower him, with a 
metal-detector, into the main sewer beneath the hotels of Miami 
Beach. There, he would prospect for jewellery flushed, accidentally, 
down the toilets. 

'It is not, I can assure you, sir,' he said, 'an unrewarding 
occupation.' 

On the night express from Moscow to Kiev, reading Donne's 
third 'Elegie': 

To live in one land, is captivitie, 
To runne all countries, a wild roguery 


This life is a hospital in which each sick man is possessed 
by a desire to change beds. One would prefer to suffer by 
the stove. Another believes he would recover if he sat by the 
window. 

I think I would be happy in that place I happen not to 
be, and this question of moving house is the subject of a 
perpetual dialogue I have with my soul. 

Baudelaire, 'Any Where Out of this World!' 

Bekom, Cameroon 

The names of taxis: The Confidence Car. Baby Confidence. The 
Return of the Gentleman Chauffeur. Le Chauffeur Kamikaze. 

In the air, Paris-Dakar 

Dinner last night at the Rue PAbee de l'Epee. Malraux was 
there. A ventriloquist! He gave a faultless imitation of the door 
to Stalin's office as it slammed on Gide's face. He and Gide 
had gone to complain about the treatment of homosexuals in 
Russia, and Stalin had got wind of their intention. 

Dakar 

The Hotel Coq Hardi is also a brothel. Its owner, Madame 
Martine, owns a fishing-boat, and so we have langouste for 
dinner. Of the two resident whores, my friend Mamzelle Yo-
Yo wears a mountainous puce pink turban and has piston rods 
for legs. The other, Madame Jacqueline, has two regular clients: 
Herr Kisch, a hydrologist, and the Ambassador of Mali. 

Yesterday was Kisch night. She appeared on her balcony, 
bangled and gleaming, the Mother-of-all-Africa in flowing robes 
of indigo. She blew him a kiss, tossed down a sprig of bougainvillaea, 
and cooed, 'Herr Kisch, I come.' 

Tonight, when the Ambassador's Mercedes pulled up outside, 
she flew out in a curvaceous, cafe-au-lait suit, a peroxide 
wig and white high-heeled shoes, shouting stridently, 'Monsieur 
PAmbassadeur, je viens!' 

Goree, Senegal 

On the terrace of the restaurant a fat French couple have been 
stuffing themselves with fruits de mer. Their dachshund, leashed 
to the woman's chair leg, keeps jumping up in the hope of 
being fed. 

Woman to dachshund, 'Taisez-vous, Romeo! C'est Pentracte.' 

Internal burning . . . wandering fever . 

Kalevala 

In The Descent of Man Darwin notes that in certain birds the 
migratory impulse is stronger than the maternal. A mother will 
abandon her fledglings in the nest rather than miss her appointment 
for the long journey south. 

Sydney Harbour 

On the ferry back from Manly a little old lady heard me 
talking. 
'You're English, aren't you?' she said, in an English North 

Country accent. 'I can tell you're English.' 
'I am.' 
'So am I! 
She was wearing thick, steel-framed spectacles and a nice 
felt hat with a wisp of blue net above the brim. 
'Are you visiting Sydney?' I asked her. 
'Lord, love, no!' she said, 'I've lived here since 1946. I came 
out to live with my son, but a very strange thing happened. 
By the time the ship got here, he'd died. Imagine! I'd given up 
my home in Doncaster, so I thought I might as well stay\ So 
I asked my second son to come out and live with me. So he 
came out. . . emigrated . . . and do you know what?' 

'No.' 
'He died. He had a heart attack, and died.' 
'That's terrible,' I said. 
'I had a third son,' she went on. 'He was my favourite, but 
he died in the war. Dunkirk, you know! He was very brave. I 
had a letter from his officer. Very brave, he was! He was on 
the deck . . . covered in blazing oil . . . and he threw himself 
into the sea. Oooh! He was a sheet of living flame!' 

'But that is terrible!' 
'But it's a lovely day,' she smiled. 'Isn't it a lovely day?' 

It was a bright sunny day with high white clouds and a 
breeze coming in off the ocean. Some yachts were beating out 
towards The Heads, and other yachts were running under spinnaker. 
The old ferry ran before the whitecaps, towards the 
Opera House and the Bridge. 

'And it's so lovely out at Manly!' she said. 'I loved to go 
out to Manly with my son . . . before he died\ But I haven't 
been for twenty years!' 

'But it's so near,' I said. 

'But I haven't been out of the house for sixteen. I was blind, 
love! My eyes was covered with cataracts, and I couldn't see 
a thing. The eye surgeon said it was hopeless, so I sat there. 
Think of it! Sixteen years in the dark! Then along comes this 
nice social worker the other week and says, "We'd better get 
those cataracts looked at." And look at me now!' 

I looked through the spectacles at a pair of twinkling - that 
is the word for them - twinkling blue eyes. 
'They took me to hospital,' she said. 'And they cut out the 
cataracts! And isn't it lovely? I can see!' 

'Yes,' I said. 'It's wonderful!' 

'It's my first time out alone,' she confided. 'I didn't tell a 
soul. I said to myself at breakfast, "It's a lovely day. I'll take 
the bus to Circular Quay, and go over on the ferry to Manly . . . 
just like we did in the old days." I had a fish lunch. Oh, it was 
lovely!' 

She hunched her shoulders mischievously, and giggled. 

'How old would you say I was?' she asked. 

'I don't know,' I said. 'Let me look at you. I'd say you were 
eighty.' 
'No. No. No,' she laughed. 'I'm ninety-three . . . and I can 

Darwin quotes the example of Audubon's goose, which, deprived 
of its pinion feathers, started out to walk the journey 
on foot. He then goes on to describe the sufferings of a bird, 
penned up at the season of its migration, which would flail its 
wings and bloody its breast against the bars of its cage. 

Robert Burton - sedentary and bookish Oxford don — devoted 
an immense amount of time and scholarship to showing that 
travel was not a curse, but a cure for melancholy: that is, for 
the depressions brought on by settlement: 

The heavens themselves run continually round, the sun riseth 
and sets, the moon increaseth, stars and planets keep their 
constant motions, the air is still tossed by the winds, the 
waters ebb and flow, to their conservation no doubt, to teach 
us that we should ever be in motion. 

There is nothing better than a change of air in this malady 
[melancholia], than to wander up and down, as those Tartari 
Zalmohenses that live in hordes, and take the opportunity 
of times, places, seasons. 

- The Anatomy of Melancholy 
, My health was menaced. Terror came. For days on end I 
fell asleep and, when I woke, the dark dreams continued. 
I was ripe for death. My debility led me along a route 
of dangers, to the world's edge, to Cimmeria, the country of 
black fog and whirlwinds. 

I was forced to travel, to ward off the apparitions assembled 
in my brain. 
Rimbaud, Une Saison en enfer 

He was a great walker. Oh! An astonishing walker, his coat 
open, a little fez on his head in spite of the sun. 
Righas, on Rimbaud in Ethiopia 

. . . along horrible tracks like those presumed to exist on the 
moon. 
Rimbaud, writing home 

'L'Homme aux semelles de vent.' 'The man with footsoles 
of wind.' 
Verlaine on Rimbaud 

Omdurman, Sudan 

Sheikh S lives in a small house overlooking the tomb of his 
grandfather, the Mahdi. On sheets of paper joined with Scotch 
tape to make a scroll, he has written a poem of five hundred 
stanzas, in the style and metre of Grey's Elegy, entitled 'Lament 
for the Destruction of the Sudanese Republic'. He has been 
giving me lessons in Arabic. He says I have the 'light of faith' 
on my forehead, and hopes to convert me to Islam. 

I say I will convert to Islam if only he will conjure up a djinn. 

'Djinns', he says, 'are difficult. But we can try.' 

After an afternoon of combing the Omdurman souk for the 
right kinds of myrrh, frankincense and perfume, we are now all 
prepared for the djinn. The Faithful have prayed. The sun has 
gone down, and we are sitting in the garden, under a papaya, 
in a mood of reverent expectation, in front of a charcoal brazier. 
The sheikh first tries a little myrrh. A wisp of smoke curls 
upward. 

No djinn. 

He tries the frankincense. 

No djinn. 

He tries everything we have bought, in turn. 

Still no djinn! 

He then says, 'Let's try the Elizabeth Arden.' 

Nouakchott, Mauritania 

An ex-Legionnaire, a veteran of Dien Bien Phu with grey hair 
en brosse and a toothy grin, is outraged at the US government 
for avoiding the blame for the My Lai massacre. 

'There is no such thing as a war crime,' he said. 'War is the 
crime.' 
He is even more outraged by the court sentence that condemned 
Lieutenant Calley for the murder of 'human Orientals' 

- as if 'Oriental' needed 'human' to qualify it. 
His definition of a soldier is as follows, 'A professional man, 
who, for thirty years, is employed to kill other men. After that, 
he prunes his roses.' 

Above all, do not lose your desire to walk: every day I walk 
myself into a state of well-being and walk away from every 
illness; I have walked myself into my best thoughts, and I 
know of no thought so burdensome that one cannot walk 
away from it. . . but by sitting still, and the more one sits 
still, the closer one comes to feeling ill . . . Thus if one just 
keeps on walking, everything will be all right. 

Soren Kierkegaard, letter to Jette (1847) 

Solvitur ambulando. 'It is solved by walking.' 

Atar, Mauritania 

'Have you seen the Indians?' asked the son of the Emir of 

Adrar. 
T have.' 
'Is it a village, or what?' 
'No,' I said. 'It's one of the greatest countries in the world.' 
'Tiens! I always thought it was a village.' 

Nouakchott, Mauritania 

A scatter of concrete buildings dumped down in the sand and 
now surrounded by a bidonville of nomads, who, like Jacob 
and his sons, have been forced into settlement 'when the famine 
was sore in the land.' 

Until last year's drought, about 80 per cent of the people in 
this country lived in the tents. 

The Moors have a passion for the colour blue. Their robes 
are blue. Their turbans are blue. The tents of the bidonville 
are patched with blue cotton; and the shanties, cobbled together 
from packing cases, are bound to have some blue paint 
somewhere. 

This afternoon I followed a wizened old crone who was 
picking over the garbage dump in search of blue rag. She picked 
up one piece. She picked up another. She compared them. She 
chucked the first piece away. At last she found a scrap which 
was exactly the shade she was looking for — and she went away 
singing. 

On the edge of town three tiny boys stopped booting their 
football and ran up to me. But instead of asking for money or 
my address, the tiniest began a very grave conversation. What 
was my opinion of the war in Biafra? What were the causes 
of the Arab-Israeli conflict? What did I think of the persecution 
of the Jews by Hitler? The Pharaonic monuments of Egypt? 
The Ancient Empire of the Almoravids? 

'But who,' I asked, 'are you?' 

He saluted stiffly. 

'Sail' 'Zakaria sail Muhammad,' he trilled in a high-pitched 
treble. 'Son of the Minister of the Interior!' 

'And how old are you?' 

'Eight.' 

Next morning a jeep arrived to take me to the Minister. 

'I believe, cher Monsieur,' he said, 'that you have met my 
son. A most interesting conversation, he tells me. I, for my 
part, would like you to dine with us, and to know if I can 
assist you in any way.' 

For a long time I prided myself I would possess every possible 
country. 
Rimbaud, Une Saison en enfer 

Mauritania, on the road to Atar 

There were about fifty people on top of the truck, huddled 
against sacks of grain. We were half-way to Atar when a sandstorm 
hit. Next to me was a strong-smelling Senegalese. He 
said he was twenty-five. He was stocky and over-muscled, and 
his teeth were orange from chewing cola nuts. 

'You are going to Atar?' he asked. 

'You too?' 

'No. I am going to France.' 

'What for?' 

(172) 

'To continue my profession.' 

'What is your profession?' 

'Installation sanitaire.' 

'You have a passport?' 

'No,' he grinned. 'I have a paper.' 

He unfolded a soggy scrap of paper on which I read that 
Don Hernando So-and-so, master of the trawler such-andsuch, 
had employed Amadou . . . surname blank . . . etc. etc. 

'I will go to Villa Cisneros,' he said. T will take a ship to 
Tenerife or Las Palmas in the Gran Canada. There I will continue 
my profession.' 

'As a sailor?' 
'No, Monsieur. As an adventurer. I wish to see all the peoples 
and all the countries of the world.' 

On the road back from Atar 

There were fifteen passengers crammed into the back of a 
canvas-hooded pick-up. All of them were Moors except for 
myself and a person covered in a sack. The sack moved, and 
the drawn and beautiful head of a young Wolof peered out. 
His skin and hair were coatediwith white dust, like the bloom 
on purple grapes. He was frightened and very upset. 

'What's the matter?' I asked. 

'It is finished. I was turned back at the frontier.' 

'Where were you going?' 

'To France.' 
'.. 'What for?' 

'To continue my profession.' 

'What is your profession?' 

'You would not understand.' 

'I would,' I said. 'I know most of the metiers in France.' 

'No,' he shook his head. 'This is not a profession that you 

would understand.' 

'Tell me.' 

Finally, with a sigh that was also a groan, he said, 'I am an 
ebeniste. I make bureaux-plats Louis Quinze and Louis Seize.' 

This he did. In Abidjan he had learned to inlay veneer at a 
furniture factory that catered to the taste of the new, black, 
francophile bourgeoisie. 

Although he had no passport, he had in his bag a book on 
French eighteenth-century furniture. His heroes were Cressent 
and Reisener. He had hoped to visit the Louvre, Versailles and 
the Musee des Arts Decoratifs. He had hoped, if possible, to 
apprentice himself to a Parisian 'master', assuming that such 
a person existed. 

London 

With Bertie to a dealer in French furniture. The dealer had 
offered a Reisener commode to Paul Getty, who had called on 
Bertie for his expertise. 

The commode had been over-restored to its original condition. 
Bertie looked at it and said, 'Oh!' 
'Well?' asked the dealer, after a long pause. 
'Well, I wouldn't put it in the maid's bedroom. But it'll do 
for him.' 

It is good to collect things, but it is better to go on walks. 
Anatole France 

My possessions fly away from me. Like locusts they are on 
the wing, flying .. . 
A lament on the destruction of Ur 

Timbuktu 

The waiter brought me the menu: 

Capitaine bamakoise (fried catfish) 
Pintade grillee 
Dessert 

'Good,' I said. 'What time can I eat?' 
'We eat at eight,' he said. 
'All'right, then. Eight.' 

'No, Monsieur. We eat at eight. You must eat before seven . . . 
or after ten.' 

'Who's we?' 

'We,' he said. 'The staff.' 

He lowered his voice and whispered: 

'I counsel you to eat at seven, Monsieur. We eat up all the 
food.' 

Christianity was planted here about a century ago, not personally, 
by Cardinal de la Vigerie, Archbishop of Carthage and 
Primate of All Africa. He was a connoisseur of burgundy and 
had his habits made at Worth. 

Among his agents in Africa were three white Fathers -
Paulmier, Boerlin and Minoret - who, shortly after saying Mass 
in the forbidden city, had their heads struck off by the Tuareg. 

The Cardinal received the news in his landau on the seafront 
at Biarritz. 

'Te Deum Laudamus!' he cried. 'But I don't believe it.' 

'No,' said his informant. 'It's true.' 

'They are really dead?' 

'They are.' 

'What joy for us! And for them!' 

The Cardinal interrupted his morning drive to write three 
identical letters of condolence to the mothers, 'God used you 
to give them birth, and God used me to send them as martyrs 
to Heaven. You have that happy certainty.' 

In a paperback copy of Tristram Shandy bought in the secondhand 
bookstore in Alice, this was scribbled in the fly-leaf, 'One 
of the few moments of happiness a man knows in Australia is 
that moment of meeting the eyes of another man over the tops 
of two beer glasses.' 

Yunnan, China 

The village schoolmaster was a chivalrous and energetic man 
with a shock of glinting blue-black hair, who lived with his 
childlike wife in a wooden house beside the Jade Stream. 

A musicologist by training, he had climbed to distant mountain villages to record the folksongs of the Na-Khi tribe. I 
believed, like Vico, that the world's first languages were in 
song. Early man, he said, had learnt to speak by imitating tin 
calls of animals and birds, and had lived in musical harmonv 
with the rest of Creation. 

His room was crammed with bric-a-brac salvaged, heaven 
knows how, from the catastrophes of the Cultural Revolution 
Perched on chairs of red lacquer, we nibbled melon seeds while 
he poured into thimbles of white porcelain a mountain tea 
known as 'Handful of Snow'. 

He played us a tape of a Na-Khi chant, sung antiphonally 
by men and women around the bier of a corpse: Wooo . . , 
Zeee! Wooo . . . Zeee! The purpose of the song was to drive 
away the Eater of the Dead, a fanged and malicious demon 
thought to feast upon the soul. 

He surprised us by his ability to hum his way through the 
mazurkas of Chopin and an apparently endless repertoire of 
Beethoven. His father, a merchant in the Lhasa caravan trade, 
had sent him in the 1940s to study Western music at the Kunming 
Academy. 

On the back wall, above a reproduction of Claude Lorrain's 
L'Embarquement pour Cythere, there were two framed photos 
of himself: one in white tie and tails behind a concert grand; 
the other, conducting an orchestra in a street of flag-waving 
crowds — a dashing and energetic figure, on tiptoe, his arms 
extended upwards and his baton down. 

'1949,' he said. 'To welcome the Red Army into Kunming.' 

'What were you playing?' 

'Schubert's "Marche militaire".' 

For this — or rather, for his devotion to 'Western culture' he 
got twenty-one years in jail. 

He held up his hands, gazing at them sadly as though they 
were long-lost orphans. His fingers were crooked and his wrists 
were scarred: a reminder of the day when the Guards strung 
him up to the roof-beams - in the attitude of Christ on the 
Cross .. . or a man conducting an orchestra. 

One commonly held delusion is that men are the wanderers 
and women the guardians of hearth and home. This can, of 
course, be so. But women, above all, are the guardians of 
continuity: if the hearth moves, they move with it. 

It is the gipsy women who keep their men on the road. 
Similarly, in the gale-lashed waters of the Cape Horn archipelago, 
it was the women of the Yaghan Indians who kept 
their embers alight in the bottom of their bark canoes. The 
missionary Father Martin Gusinde compared them to the 'Ancient 
Vestals' or to 'fidgety birds of passage who were happy 
and inwardly calm only when they were on the move'. 

In Central Australia, women are the driving force behind the 
return to the old ways of life. As one woman said to a friend 
of mine, 'Women are ones for country.' 

Mauritania 

Two days out from Chinguetti we had to cross a gloomy grey 
canyon with not a green thing in sight. On the valley floor 
there were several dead camels, their desiccated hides flapping 
rat. . . tat. . . tat. . . against the ribcages. 

It was almost dark by the time we'd climbed the opposite 
cliff. A sandstorm was brewing. The camels were restless. One 
of the guides then pointed to some tents: three of goat-hair and 
one of white cotton, about half a mile away among the dunes. 

We approached slowly. The guides screwed up their faces, 
trying to decide if the tents were of a friendly tribe. Then one 
of them smiled, said 'Lalakhlal!' and put his camels into a trot. 

A tall young man drew back the tent-flap and beckoned us 
forward. We dismounted. His robes were blue and he was 
wearing yellow slippers. 

An old woman brought us dates and goats' milk, and the 
sheikh gave orders for a kid to be killed. 
'Nothing has changed', I said to myself, 'since the days of 
Abraham and Sarah.' 

The sheikh, Sidi Ahmed el Beshir Hammadi, spoke perfect 
French. After supper, as he poured the mint tea, I asked him, 
naively, why life in the tents, for all its hardship, was irresistible. 

'Bah!' he shrugged. 'I'd like nothing better than to live in a 
house in town. Here in the desert you can't keep clean. You 
can't take a shower! It's the women who make us live in the 
desert. They say the desert brings health and happiness, to 
them and to the children.' 

Timbuktu 

The houses are built of grey mud. Many of the walls are covered 
with graffiti, written in chalk in the neatest of copybook hands: 
Les noms de ceux qui voyagent dans la nuit sont Sidi et Yeye. 

Helas! Les Anges de l'Enfer. 

Beaute . . . Beau ... 

La poussiere en Decembre . . . 

Useless to ask a wandering man 
Advice on the construction of a house. 
The work will never come to completion. 


After reading this text, from the Chinese Book of Odes, I 
realised the absurdity of trying to write a book on Nomads. 

Psychiatrists, politicians, tyrants are forever assuring us that 
the wandering life is an aberrant form of behaviour; a neurosis; 
a form of unfulfilled sexual longing; a sickness which, in the 
interests of civilisation, must be suppressed. 

Nazi propagandists claimed that gipsies and Jews — peoples 
with wandering in their genes — could find no place in a stable 
Reich. 

Yet, in the East, they still preserve the once universal concept: 
that wandering re-establishes the original harmony which 
once existed between man and the universe. 

There is no happiness for the man who does not travel. 

Living in the society of men, the best man becomes a sinner. 

For Indra is the friend of the traveller. Therefore wander! 

Aitareya Brahmana 

You cannot travel on the path before you have become the 
Path itself. 
Gautama Buddha 

Walk on! 
His last word to his disciples 

In Islam, and especially among the Sufi Orders, siyahat or 
'errance' - the action or rhythm of walking - was used as a 
technique for dissolving the attachments of the world and allowing 
men to lose themselves in God. 

The aim of a dervish was to become a 'dead man walking': 
one whose body stays alive on the earth yet whose soul is 
already in Heaven. A Sufi manual, the Kashf-al-Mabjub, says 
that, towards the end of his journey, the dervish becomes the 
Way not the wayfarer, i.e. a place over which something is 
passing, not a traveller following his own free will. 

Arkady, to whom I mentioned this, said it was quite similar 
to an Aboriginal concept, 'Many men afterwards become country, 
in that place, Ancestors.' 

By spending his whole life walking and singing his Ancestor's 
Songline, a man eventually became the track, the Ancestor and 
the song. 

The Wayless Way, where the Sons of God lose themselves 
and, at the same time, find themselves. 
Meister Eckhart 

He is by nature led 

To peace so, perfect that the young behold 

With envy, what the old man hardly feels. 

Wordsworth, 'Old Man Travelling' 

A very brief life of Diogenes: 

He lived in a tub. He ate raw octopus and lupins. He said, 
'Kosmopolites eimi.' 'I am a citizen of the world.' He compared 
his wanderings through Greece to the migration of storks: 
north in summer, south to avoid the winter cold.' 

We Lapps have the same nature as the reindeer: in the spring
time we long for the mountains; in winter we are drawn to 
the woods. 

Turi's Book of Lappland 

In ancient India the monsoon made travel impossible. And 
since the Buddha did not want his followers to wade up to 
their necks in floodwater, He allowed them a 'rain retreat', the 
Vassa. During this time, the homeless pilgrims were to congregate 
on higher ground and live in huts of wattle and daub. 

It was from these sites that the great Buddhist monasteries 
arose. 

In the early Christian Church there were two kinds of pilgrimage: 
'to wander for God' (atnbulare pro Deo) in imitation of 
Christ or of Father Abraham who quit the city of Ur and went 
to live in a tent. The second was the 'penitential pilgrimage': 
in which criminals guilty of 'enormous crimes' ( peccata enormia) 
were required, in accordance with a fixed set of tariffs, 
to assume the role of travelling beggar — with hat, purse, baton 
and badge - and work out their salvation on the road. 

The idea that walking dissolved crimes of violence goes back 
to the wanderings forced on Cain to atone for the murder of 
his brother. 

Walata, Mauritania 

The camel-men wore flaying knives instead of rosaries around 
their necks, and had served as auxiliaries with the Legion. At 
sunset, they took me to a house on the edge of town in order 
to hear the bbagi. 

The bhagi was a holy wanderer who would walk from oasis 
to oasis in the company of his toothless old father. His eyes 
were clouded blue almonds. He had been blind from birth and 
the father had to lead him everywhere. 

He knew the whole of the Koran by heart and, when we 
found him, he was crouched against the mud-brick wall, chanting 
the suras with an uplifted smile while the father turned the 
pages of the Book. The words came faster and faster until they 
tailed off into a continuous hammering rhythm, like a drum 
solo. The father flipped over the pages, and the people in the 
crowd began to sway with a 'lost' look, as though they were 
on the verge of trance. 

Suddenly, the bhagi stopped. There was a moment of absolute 
silence. The next verse he began to enunciate very, very 
slowly, twisting his tongue around the gutturals, flinging the 
words, one by one, at the audience, who caught them as messages 
from 'out there'. 

The father rested his head against his son's shoulder, and 
let out a deep sigh. 

Life is a bridge. Cross over it, but build no house on it. 
Indian proverb 

On the spring migration, province of Fars 

Between Firuzabad and Shiraz, the Quashgai migration is in 
full swing: mile on mile of sheep and goats, like ant-trails if you 
watch them from the hillsides. Hardly a blade of grass: a dusting 
of green on the mountains but along the route only a white 
broom in flower, and a grey-leaved artemisia. The animals thin 
and weak, skin-covered bone but little more. Now and then one 

(181) 

falls out of line, like a soldier fainting on parade, totters and 
falls, and then it's a race between the vultures and the dogs. 

Slavering mastiffs! Red-headed vultures! But are their heads 
really red or red with blood? Both! They are both red and 
blooded. And when you look along the way we've come, there 
are spirals of vultures, wheeling. 

The Quashgai men were lean, hard-mouthed, weatherbeaten 
and wore cylindrical caps of white felt. The women were in 
all their finery: bright calico dresses bought especially for the 
springtime journey. Some rode horses and donkeys; some were 
on camels, along with the tents and tent poles. Their bodies 
ebbed and flowed to the pitching saddles. Their eyes were 
blinkered to the road ahead. 

A woman in saffron and green rode by on a black horse. 
Behind her, bundled up together on the saddle, a child was 
playing with a motherless lamb; copper pots were clanking, 
and there was a rooster tied on with a string. 

She was also suckling a baby. Her breasts were festooned 
with necklaces, of gold coins and amulets. Like most nomad 
women, she wore her wealth. 

What, then, are a nomad baby's first impressions of this 
world? A swaying nipple and a shower of gold. 

The Huns burn with an insatiable lust for gold. 
Ammianus Marcellinus 

For they had golden earrings, because they were Ishmaelites. 
Judges 8:24 

A good horse is a member of the family. 
Quashgai saying 

Dasht-i-Arjan, near Shiraz 

The old man crouched beside his dying chestnut mare: on migration, 
the horses are the first to drop. He had found a patch of fresh 
grass. He had coaxed the mare on to it and was trying to ram a 
handful between her teeth. It was too late. She lay on her side, 
tongue out, with the glazed eyes of approaching death. 

The old man bit his lip and cried, sparingly, a drop or two 
down either cheek. Then he shouldered the saddle without a 
backward glance, and together we walked to the road. 

Along the road we were picked up by one of the khans in his 
Land-Rover. 

He was a straight-backed old gentleman, with a monocle and 
some knowledge of Europe. He owned a house and orchards in 
Shiraz: but every spring, he put himself on call to help his kin. 

He took me to a tent where his fellow khans were meeting 
to discuss their strategy. One was a very chic type in a padded 
yellow ski jacket. He had what I took to be a skier's tan. I 
suspected him of coming straight from St Moritz, and he mistrusted 
me on sight. 

The khan they all deferred to was a wiry, hook-nosed man 
with a growth of grey stubble on his chin, who sat on a kelim, 
listening to the others' arguments without moving a muscle. 
Then he reached for a scrap of paper and, on it, drew some 
wiggly lines in ball-point. 

This was the order of precedence in which the different clans 
were to move through the next stretch of country. 

The same scene is described in Genesis 13:9 when Abraham 
the bedouin sheikh becomes worried that his cowboys will 
start fighting with the cowboys of Lot, 'Is not the whole land 
before thee? Separate thyself, I pray thee, from me: If thou 
wilt take the left hand, then I will go to the right; or if thou 
depart to the right hand, then I will go to the left.' 

Any nomad migration must be organised with the precision 
and flexibility of a military campaign. Behind, the grass is 
shrivelling. Ahead, the passes may be blocked with snow. 

Most nomads claim to 'own' their migration path (in Arabii. 
Il-Rdh, 'The Way'), but in practice they only lay claim to 
seasonal grazing rights. Time and space are thus dissolved 
around each other: a month and a stretch of road are synonymous. 

But a nomad's migration - unlike that of a hunter - is not his 
own. It is, rather, a guided tour of animals whose instinctive 
sense of direction has been blunted by domestication. It calls 
for skill and risk-taking. A man, like Job, can be ruined in a 
single season: as were the nomads of the Sahel, or the Wyoming 
cattle companies in the Great White Winter of 1886-7 . 

In a bad season, a nomad's temptation to stray from his path 
is irresistible; but the army is waiting for him with sub-machine 
guns. 

'The Army,' said my friend, the old khan, 'has now replaced 
the lion and the wolf.' 

Nomos is Greek for 'pasture', and 'the Nomad' is a chief or 
clan elder who presides over the allocation of pastures. Nomos 
thus came to mean 'law', 'fair distribution', 'that which is 
allotted by custom' - and so the basis of all Western law. 

The verb nemein - to 'graze', 'to pasture', 'to range', or 'to 
spread' — has a second sense as early as Homer: 'to deal', 'to 
apportion' or 'to dispense' - especially of land, honour, meat 
or drink. Nemesis is the 'distribution of justice' and so of 'divine 
justice'. Nomisma means 'current coin': hence 'numismatics'. 

The nomads known to Homer were the 'mare-milking' Scythians 
who roamed with their wagons acorss the south Russian 
steppe. They were a people who buried their chiefs under grave 
mounds, with horses and treasures of gold. 

But the origins of nomadism are very hard to assess. 

Bandiagara, Mali 

Madame Dieterlen, an old Africa hand, gave me coffee in her 
caravan on the edge of the Dogon cliff. I asked her what traces 
the Bororo Peul — cattle herders of the Sahel — would leave for 
an archaeologist once they had moved off a campsite. 

She thought for a moment, and answered, 'They scatter the 
ashes of their fires. No. Your archaeologist would not find 
those. But the women do weave little chaplets from grass stems, 
and hang them from the branch of their shade tree.' 

Max Weber traces the origins of modern capitalism to certain 
Calvinists who, disregarding the parable of the camel and the 
eye of the needle, preached the doctrine of the just rewards of 
work. Yet the concept of shifting and increasing one's 'wealth 
on the hoof has a history as old as herding itself. Domesticated 
animals are 'currency', 'things that run', from the French count. 
In fact, almost all our monetary expressions — capital, 
stock, pecuniary, chattel, sterling — perhaps even the idea of 
'growth' itself - have their origins in the pastoral world. 

Is it not passing brave to be a King, 
And ride in triumph through Persepolis? 

Marlowe, Tamburlaine the Great, Part I, 1 ,758 

Persepolis, Tars 

We were walking to Persepolis in the rain. The Quashgais were 
soaked and happy, and the animals were soaked; and when the 
rain let up, they shook the water from their coats and moved on, 
as though they were dancing. We passed an orchard with a mud 
wall around it. There was a smell of orange blossom, after rain. 

A boy was walking beside me. He and a girl exchanged a 
flashing glance. She was riding behind her mother on a camel, 
but the camel was moving faster. 

About three miles short of Persepolis we came to some huge 
domed tents under construction, to which the Shah-i-Shah had 
invited a riff-raff of royalty for his coronation in June. The 
tents were designed by the Paris firm of decorators, Jansen. 

Someone was yelling, in French. 

I tried to get the Quashgai boy to comment, or even to look 
at the tents. But he shrugged and looked the other way - and 
so we went on to Persepolis. 

Passing Persepolis I looked at the fluted columns, the porticoes, 
lions, bulls, griffins; the sleek metallic finish of the 
stone, and the line on line of megalomaniac inscription: 'I. . . 

I . . . I . .. The King . . . The King . . . burned .. . slew . . . 
settled 

My sympathies were with Alexander for burning it. 

Again I tried to get the Quashgai boy to look. Again he 
shrugged. Persepolis might have been made of matchsticks for 
all he knew or cared - and so we went up to the mountains. 

Pyramids, arches, obelisks, were but the irregularities of vainglory, 
and wild enormities of ancient magnanimity. 
Sir Thomas Browne, Urne Buriall 

London 

Franco S., returning from Iran for the first time since the fall 
of the Shah, says that, among the side effects of the Khomeini 
Revolution, the Quashgai have recovered their strength and 
their mobility. 

The tradition of the camp-fire faces that of the pyramid. 
Martin Buber, Moses 

Before addressing the crowds at the Nuremberg Rallies, the 
Fuhrer would commune with himself in a subterranean chamber 
modelled on the tomb in the Great Pyramid. 

'Look! I've drawn a skull on the top of the Pyramid.' 

'Why did you do that, Sedig?' 

'I like drawing scary things.' 

'What's the skull doing on the Pyramid?' 

'Because a giant's buried in there, and his skull's popping 
it.' 

'What do you think of that giant?' 

'Bad.' 

'Why?' 

'Because he eats people up.' 

Conversation with Sedig el Fadil el Mahdi, aged six 

Jahweh's horror of hewn masonry, 'And if thou wilt make me 
an altar of stone, thou shalt not build it of hewn stone: for if 
thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou hast polluted it.' 

Exodus 20:25 

. . . but no man knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day. 
Deuteronomy 34:6 

In the last of the moonlight a dog howls and falls silent. The 
firelight flutters and the watchman yawns. A very old man 
walks silently past the tents, feeling his way with a stick to 
make sure he doesn't trip on the tent ropes. He walks on. His 
people are moving to a greener country. Moses has an appointment 
with the jackals and vultures. 

Pompey in Jerusalem, after barging his way into the Temple, 
demanded to be shown the Holy of Holies, and was surprised 
to find himself in an empty room. 

Herodotus records the visit of some Greeks to Egypt, who, 
on seeing the man-made mountains of limestone, called them 
pyramides because their shape reminded them of little wheaten 
cakes that were sold on street stalls. He adds that the local 
inhabitants preserved a memory of their construction as a 
time of horror and were unable to pronounce the names of 
the builders, Cheops and Chephren, preferring to call them 

'Philitis', after the name of a shepherd who had once pastured 
his flock in their shadow. 

Masonry, and is it man's? .. . I shudder at the thought of 
the ancient Egyptians. 
Herman Melville, Journey up the Straits 

Djinguereber Mosque, Timbuktu 

Row on row of gloomy mudbrick arches. Bat guano. Wasps' 
nests in the rafters. Shafts of sunlight falling on reed mats like 
the beams of a burning glass. 

The marabout interrupted his prayers to ask me a few 
questions. 

'There is a people call the Mericans?' he asked. 

'There is.' 

'They say they have visited the Moon.' 

'They have.' 

'They are blasphemers.' 

A very short History of the Skyscraper: 

Everyone knows that the Tower of Babel was conceived as 
an attack on Heaven. The officials in charge of the construction 
were few. The work-force was innumerable: and in order that 
commands might not be misconstrued, every worker was required 
to speak the same language. 

Little by little, as the courses of masonry succeeded one 
another, the Highest Authority became anxious that the concept 
of a war against Heaven might be meaningless: worse, 
that God in His Heaven might not exist. At an emergency 
session of the Central Committee, it was decided to launch a 
probe into the sky. Salvoes of missiles were fired off, vertically; 
and when these returned to Earth, bloodstained, here was proof 
that God, after all, was mortal; and that work on the Tower 
should proceed. 

He, for His Part, resented being pricked in the backside. One 
morning, with a disdainful puff, He unsteadied the arm of a 
mason on one of the uppermost terraces, causing him to drop 
a brick on to the head of a fellow mason below. It was an 
accident. Everyone knew it was an accident, but the mason 
below began shouting threats and insults. His comrades tried 
to calm him, in vain. Everyone took sides in the quarrel without 
knowing what the quarrel was about. Everyone, in his righteous 
anger, refused to listen to what his neighbour was saying, 
and used language intended to confuse. The Central Committee 
was helpless: and the work gangs, each of whom now spoke 
a different language, took refuge from each other in remotest 
regions of the Earth. 

After Josephus, Jewish Antiquities, i, iv 

Without Compulsion no settlement could be founded. The 
workers would have no supervisor. The rivers would not 
bring the overflow. 

Sumerian text 

To the Babylonian 'bab-if meant 'Gate of God'. To the Hebrews 
the same word meant 'confusion', perhaps 'cacophonous 
confusion'. The ziggurats of Mesopotamia were 'Gates of God', 
painted the seven colours of the rainbow and dedicated to Anu 
and Enlil, divinities representing Order and Compulsion. 

It was surely a marvellous intuition on the part of the ancient 
Jews — sandwiched as they were between bullying empires — 
to have conceived the State as Behemoth or Leviathan, as a 
monster which threatened human life. They were, perhaps, the 
first people to understand that the Tower was chaos, that order 
was chaos, and that language - the gift of tongues which Jahweh 
breathed into the mouth of Adam - has a rebellious and 
wayward vitality compared to which the foundations of the 
Pyramid are as dust. 

On the train, Frankfurt—Vienna 

He was on his way to see his old father, who was a rabbi in 
Vienna. He was short and fat. He had pallid white skin and 
ginger ringlets, and wore a long serge greatcoat and beaver 
hat. He was very shy. He was so shy he found it impossible 
to undress with anyone else in the compartment. The sleepingcar 
attendant had assured him he would be alone. 

I offered to go into the corridor. The train was passing 
through a forest. I opened the window and breathed in the 
smell of pines. When I came back, ten minutes later, he was 
lying on the upper bunk, relaxed and eager to talk. 

For sixteen years he had been studying at a Talmudic Academy 
in Brooklyn: he had not seen his father since. The morning 
would reunite them. 

Before the war his family had lived at Sibiu in Romania and, 
when the war came, they hoped they were safe. Then, in 1942., 
Nazis painted a star on their house. 

The rabbi shaved his beard and cut his ringlets. His Gentile 
servant fetched him a peasant costume: a felt hat, a belted 
tunic, a sheepskin jacket and boots. He embraced his wife, his 
two daughters and the baby boy: all four of them would die 
in Birkenau. He took his first-born son in his arms, and dashed 
for the woods. 

The rabbi walked through the Carpathian beech forests with 
his son. Shepherds sheltered them and gave them meat: the 
way the shepherds slaughtered sheep did not offend his principles. 
Eventually, they crossed the Turkish frontier and made 
their way to America. 

The rabbi never felt at ease in America. He could sympathise 
with Zionism, but never bring himself to join. Israel was an 
idea, not a country. Wherever was the Torah, there was the 
Kingdom also. He had left, in despair, for Europe. 

Now father and son were returning to Romania, since, only 
a few weeks earlier, the rabbi had received a sign. Late one 
night, in his apartment in Vienna, he reluctantly answered the 
doorbell. On the landing stood an old woman with a shopping 
basket. She had bluish lips and wispy white hair. Dimly, he 
"ecognised his Gentile servant. 

'I have found you,' she said. 'Your house is safe. Your books 
are safe, your clothes even. For years I pretended it was now 
a Gentile house. I am dying. Here is the key.' 

Sbahrak, Afghanistan 

The Tajiks say they are the oldest people in the land. They 
plant wheat, flax and melons. They have long, resigned faces, 
and exhaust themselves in tending irrigation ditches. They keep 
fighting partridges, and do not know how to look after horses. 

In the valley above the Tajik village, we came to a camp of 
Firuzkuhi Aimaqs. Their yurts had domed white roofs, and the 
sides were painted with lozenges, scrolls and chequers in every 
conceivable colour, like a field of chivalry. Horses were grazing 
in a meadow of cornflowers, and there were white-leaved willows 
along the stream. We saw a fat-tailed sheep with a tail 
so big it had to be strapped to a cart. Outside the yurts, some 
women in purple were carding wool. 

This is the time of year when the farmers and nomads, after 
a season of acrimony, are suddenly the best of friends. The 
harvest is in. The nomads buy grain for the winter. The villagers 
buy cheese and hides and meat. They welcome the sheep on 
to their fields: to break up the stubble and manure it for autumn 
planting. 

Nomad and planter are the twin arms of the so-called 'Neolithic 
Revolution,' which, in its classic form, took place around 
8 ,500 BC on the slopes of the Fertile Crescent, the well-watered 
'land of hills and valleys' that stretches in an arc from Palestine 
to south-western Iran. Here, at altitudes of 3,000 feet or so, 
the wild ancestors of our sheep and goats would browse over 
stands of wild wheat and barley. 

Gradually, as each of these four species was domesticated, 
the farmers spread downhill on to the alluvial floodplains, from 
which the first cities would arise. The herdsmen, for their part, 
took to the summer uplands and founded a rival order of their 
own. 

The Amorite who knows not grain .. . A people whose onslaught 
is like a hurricane .. . A people who have never 
known a city . . . 

Sumerian text 

Ouissa, Mountains of Air, Niger 

The garden was circular. Its soil was black. Around the perimeter 
ran a palisade of thorn bush, to keep away the camels and 
goats. At the centre stood two ancient date palms, flanking the 
well-shaft and a tank. 

Four irrigation ditches divided the garden into quarters. The 
quarters were further divided into a maze of vegetable beds 
and planted with peas, beans, onions, carrots, greens, squashes 
and tomatoes. 

The gardener was a negro slave, naked but for a breechclout. 
He was lost in concentration on his work. He would heave 
the leather bucket up the shaft and watch the water threading 
round the labyrinth. When one crop had had its fill, he would 
dam up the channel with his hoe, and divert the current on to 
the next patch. 

A short way up the valley, there were other circular palisades 
of thorn, into which the Tuareg drove their goats at night. 

The Negro in command of his seedlings shares a common 
destiny with the first dictators. Sumerian and Egyptian archives 
tell us that the earliest rulers of civilisation saw themselves as 
'Lords of the Fertilising Waters' - who would either bring life 
to their wilting subjects or turn the taps off. 

Abel, in whose death the Church Fathers saw the martyrdom 
of Christ prefigured, was a keeper of sheep. Cain was a settled 
farmer. Abel was the favourite of God, because Jahweh himself 
was a 'God of the Way' whose restlessness precluded other 
gods. Yet Cain, who would build the first city, was promised 
dominion over him. 

A verse of the Midrash, commenting on the quarrel, says that 
the sons of Adam inherited an equal division of the world: 
Cain the ownership of all land, Abel of all living creatures — 
whereupon Cain accused Abel of trespass. 

The names of the brothers are a matched pair of opposites. 
Abel comes from the Hebrew lhebel\ meaning 'breath' or 'vapour': 
anything that lives and moves and is transient, including 
his own life. The root of 'Cain' appears to be the verb 'kanah': 
to 'acquire', 'get', 'own property', and so 'rule' or 'subjugate'. 

'Cain' also means 'metal-smith'. And since, in several languages 
- even Chinese - the words for 'violence' and 'subjugation' 
are linked to the discovery of metal, it is perhaps the 
destiny of Cain and his descendants to practise the black arts 
of technology. 

A possible synopsis for the Murder: 

Cain is a painstaking fellow, bent double from constant 
digging. The day is hot and cloudless. Eagles are floating high 
above in the blue. The last of the snowmelt still cascades down 
the valley, but the hillsides are already brown and parched. 
Flies cluster at the corners of his eyes. He wipes the sweat from 
his forehead, and resumes his work. His hoe has a wooden 
handle, with a stone blade hafted on to it. 

Somewhere, higher up the slope, Abel is resting in the cool 
of a rock. He trills at his flute: again and again, the same 
insistent trills. Cain pauses to listen. Stiffly, he straightens his 
back. Then, raising his hand against the glare, he peers at his 
fields along the stream. The sheep have trampled his morning's 
work. Without having time to think, he breaks into a run . . . 

A less excusable version of the story says that Cain lay in 
ambush for Abel and heaved a rock on to his head - in which 
case the killing was the fruit of brewed-up bitterness and envy: 
the envy of the prisoner for the freedom of open spaces. 

Jahweh allows Cain to make atonement, only if he pays the 
price. He denies him the 'fruits of the earth' and forces him to 
wander 'a fugitive and a vagabond' in the Land of Nod: 'Nod' 
meaning 'wilderness' or 'desert', where Abel once wandered 
before him. 

'Travel': same word as 'travail' - 'bodily or mental labour', 
'toil, especially of a painful or oppressive nature', 'exertion', 
'hardship', 'suffering'. A 'journey'. 

Cain's City built with Human Blood, not Blood of Bulls and 
Goats. 
William Blake, 'The Ghost of Abel' 

'Alone and amid the nations', masters of the raid, avid for 
increase yet disgusted by possessions, driven by the fantasy of 
all travellers to pine for a stable home - no people but the 
Jews have ever felt more keenly the moral ambiguities of settlement. 
Their God is a projection of their perplexity. Their 
Book - the Old Testament and the New - may be read, on 
one level at least, as a monumental dialogue between Him and 
His People in the rights and wrongs of living in the Land. 

Was it to be a land for fields and houses? A land of corn 
and wine? Of cities which they had not built and vineyards 
which they did not plant? Or was it to be a country of black 
tent and goat path ? A nomad's country of milk and wild honey? 
A Kingdom where the people 'may dwell in a place of their 
own, and move no more?' (n Samuel 7 :10) Or was it, as Heine 
surmised, 'a portable kingdom' which could only exist in men's 
hearts? 

Jahweh, in origin, is a God of the Way. His sanctuary is the 
Mobile Ark, His House a tent, His Altar a cairn of rough 
stones. And though He may promise His Children a wellwatered 
land — as blue and green are a bedouin's favourite 
colours - He secretly desires for them the Desert. 

He leads them out of Egypt, away from the fleshpots and 
the overseer's lash, a journey of three days into the harsh clean 
air of Sinai. There He gives them their Solemn Feast, the Passover: 
a feast of roasted lamb and bitter herbs, of bread baked 
not in an oven but on a hot stone. And He commands them 
to eat it 'in haste', with shodden feet and sticks in hand, to 
remind them, forever, that their vitality lies in movement. 

He gives them their 'ring dance', the hag: a dance that mimes 
the antics of goats on their spring migration 'as when one goeth 
with a pipe into the mountains of the Lord'. He appears in the 
Burning Bush and in the Pillar of Fire. He is everything that Egypt 
is not. Yet He will allow himself the doubtful honour of a Temple 

— and regret it: 'They have set their abominations in the house 
which is called by my name, to pollute it.' (Jeremiah 7:30) 
The ghettos of Eastern Europe were each a little patch of desert 
'where no green thing would grow'. Jews were forbidden by 
their Christian masters to own land or houses; to grow their 
own vegetables, or practise any trade but usury. And though 
they were allowed to gather sticks for firewood, they might 
not saw a plank, in case this led to building. 

The Gentiles, who imposed these restrictions, believed they 
were punishing the Jews for the crime of killing Christ - as 
Jahweh had punished Cain. Orthodox Jews believed that, by 
accepting them, they were re-living the journey through Sinai, 
when the People had found favour with their Lord. 

The prophets Isaiah, Jeremiah, Amos and Hosea were nomadic 
revivalists who howled abuse at the decadence of civilisation. 
By sinking roots in the land, by 'laying house to house and 
field to field', by turning the Temple into a sculpture gallery, 
the people had turned from their God. 

How long, O Lord, how long? . . . 'Until the cities be 
wasted . . .' The prophets looked to a Day of Restoration when 
the Jews would return to the frugal asceticism of nomadic life. 
In the Vision of Isaiah they are promised a Saviour, whose 
name would be Emmanuel, and who would be a herdsman. 

When Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon, had the Jews penned 
up behind the walls of Jerusalem, Jeremiah reminded them of 
the Rechabites, the only tribe to have resisted the blandishments 
of settled life: 

We will drink no wine: for Jonadab the son of Rechab our 
father commanded us, saying, Ye shall drink no wine, neither 
ye nor your sons for ever: Neither shall ye build house, nor 
sow seed, nor plant vineyard, nor have any: but all your 
days ye shall dwell in tents; that ye may live many days in 
the land where ye be strangers. 

Jeremiah 35:6-7 

The Rechabites alone, by preserving tactical mobility, would 
escape the horrors of siege warfare. 

In the Muqaddimah or 'Universal History', of Ib'n Khaldun, 
a philosopher who surveyed the human condition from a nomadic 
viewpoint, we read: 

The Desert People are closer to being good than settled peoples 
because they are closer to the First State and are more 
removed from all the evil habits that have infected the hearts 
of settlers. 

By 'desert people', Ib'n Khaldun means the bedouin such as 
those he once recruited, as mercenaries from the heart of the 
Sahara, in the days of his warlike youth. 

Years later, when he had gazed into the slanting eyes of 
Tamerlane and witnessed the piles of skulls and smouldering 
cities, he, too, like the Old Testament prophets, felt the fearful 
anxiety of civilisation, and looked back with longing to life in 
the tents. 

Ib'n Khaldun based his system on the intuition that men decline, 
morally and physically, as they drift towards cities. 

The rigours of the desert, he suggested, had preceded the 
softness of cities. The desert was thus a reservoir of civilisation, 
and desert peoples had the advantage over settlers because they 
were more abstemious, freer, braver, healthier, less bloated, 
less craven, less liable to submit to rotten laws, and altogether 
easier to cure. 

Monastery of Simonaspetras, Mount Athos 

A young Hungarian, exhausted after climbing the Holy Mountain, 
came and sat on the balcony and stared at the stormy sea 
below. He had trained as an epidemiologist but had given up 
this work in order to climb the sacred mountains of the world. 
He hoped to climb Mount Ararat and to circumambulate Mount 
Kailash in Tibet. 

'Man,' he said suddenly, without warning, 'was not meant 
to settle down.' 

This was something he had learnt from his study of epidemics. 
The story of infectious disease was a story of men brewing 
in their own filth. He also made the observation that Pandora's 
Box of Ills had been a Neolithic pottery urn. 

'Make no mistake,' he said. 'Epidemics are going to make 
nuclear weapons seem like useless toys.' 

It was no summer Progresse. A cold coming they had of it, 
at this time of the yeare; just the worst time of the yeare to 
take a journey, and specially a long journey, in. 

Lancelot Andrews (1622) 

In Middle English, the word 'progress' meant a 'journey', 
particularly a 'seasonal journey' or 'circuit'. 

A 'progress' was the journey of a king round the castles of 
his barons, a bishop round his dioceses, a nomad round his 
pastures, a pilgrim round a sequence of shrines. 'Moral' or 
'material' forms of progress were unknown until the seventeenth 
century. 

In Tibetan, the definition of a 'human being' is a-Gro ba, 'a 
go-er', 'one who goes on migrations'. Likewise, an arab (or 
bedu) is a 'dweller in the tents', as opposed to bazar: 'he who 
lives in a house'. Yet at times even a bedu must settle, fettered 
to a desert well during the hot dry season in August: the month 
that gave its name to Ramadan (from rams, 'to burn'). 

All things considered there are only two kinds of men in the 
world: those that stay at home and those that do not. 
Rudyard Kipling 

Yet this may be a question of seasonal variation. . . . 

Few climates lack a lean season: a time of torment and 
enforced inactivity, when men are at their weakest and the 
carnivores most hungry. (Ramadan is also 'the time of the 
beasts'.) In his essay on the seasonal fluctuations of Eskimo 
societies, Marcel Mauss contrasts the plentiful, 'irreligious' 
summer life in the tents with the hungry, 'spiritual', and emotionally 
charged activities of winter settlement in the igloo. 
Colin Turnbull, on the other hand, tells us that the Mbuti 
Pygmies of Equatoria spend most of the year roaming their 
rainforest in conditions of assured abundance: yet they too 
settle for a season, 'ritualising' a phase of scarcity (and settlement) 
where none need exist. 

I have sometimes thought it possible to advance a theory of 
settlement — and therefore of civilization - as 'the lean season 
capitalized'. 

Hong Kong 

Paddy Booz tells of meeting a Taoist Grand Master on the 
streets of a provincial Chinese city. The man was wearing his 
Grand Master's blue robes and high hat. He and his young 
disciple had walked the length and breadth of China. 

'But what', Paddy asked him, 'did you do during the Cultural 
Revolution?' 
'I went for a walk in the Kun L'ung Mountains.' 

Driving with Arkady I remembered a passage in Vernadsky's 
Early Russia, which describes how Slav peasants would submerge 
themselves in a marsh, breathing through hollow reeds 
until the sound of the horsemen died away. 

'Come home and meet my Dad,' he said. 'He and his mates 
did that when the Panzers came through the village.' 

Quadrupedante putrem sonitu quatit ungula campum. Virgil's 
exemplary hexameter, to describe the thud of horse hooves 
over a plain, has its Persian equivalent in the utterance of 
a survivor from the Mongol sack of Bokhara, Amdand u 
khandand u sokhtand u kushtand u burdand u raftand. 'They 
came and they sapped and they burned and they slew and 
they trussed up their loot and were gone.' 

In his History of the World Conqueror Juvaini says that 
all his writing, and all the horror of those times, is contained 
in this one line. 

From Henry Yule's Marco Polo i, 233 

A man afoot ain't a man at all. 
Texas cowboy 

On the cruelty of Nomads: 

I do not have a mill with willow trees 
I have a horse and a whip 
I will kill you and go. 

Yomut Turkoman 

In 1223 the Novgorod Chronicle recorded the arrival from 
Tartary of a sorceress and two men with her, who demanded 
one-tenth of everything: 'of men, princes, horses, treasure, of 
everything one-tenth'. 

The Russian princes said no. The Mongol invasion was on. 

Leningrad 

A picnic in the office of a Professor of Archaeology: caviar, 
black bread, slabs of smoked sturgeon, onions, radishes and 
a bottle of Stolichnaya — for two. 

For most of the morning, I had been canvassing his views 
on the mechanics of nomad invasions. Toynbee held to the 
theory that a phase of drought, somewhere on the Central 

Asian steppe, would dislodge a tribe from its grazing grounds 
and cause a 'house of cards' effect, with ripples from Europe 
to China. 

It had struck me, however, that nomads were at their most 
invasive, not in times of want but abundance; in times of 
maximum growth, when the grass was greenest and the herdsmen 
allowed their stock to increase beyond the point of 
stability. 

As for the Professor, his nomads seemed to have moved in 
nice, tight, obedient circles, without troubling their neighbours 
or trespassing on what are now the boundaries of the Socialist 
Republics. 

Later, after a few more shots of vodka, he enfolded me in 
a fraternal, pan-European embrace, and, pushing the corners of 
his eyes into a pair of slits, said, 'What we hate is this, isn't it?' 

'Not me,' I said. 

The Desert est monotheiste. Renan's aphorism implies that blank 
horizons and a dazzling sky will clear the mind of its distractions 
and allow it to concentrate on the Godhead. But life in 
the desert is not like that! 

To survive at all, the desert dweller - Tuareg or Aboriginal 
— must develop a prodigious sense of orientation. He must 
forever be naming, sifting, comparing a thousand different 
'signs' - the tracks of a dung beetle or the ripple of a dune — 
to tell him where he is; where the others are; where rain has 
fallen; where the next meal is coming from; whether if plant 
X is in flower, plant Y will be in berry, and so forth. 
It is a paradox of the monotheistic faiths that, although they 
arose within the ambit of the desert, the desert people themselves 
show an indifference towards the Almighty that is decidedly 
cavalier. 'We will go up to God and salute him,' said 
a bedu to Palgrave in the 1860s, 'and if he proves hospitable, 
we will stay with him: if otherwise, we will mount our horses 
and ride off.' 

Muhammad said, 'No man becomes a prophet who was not 
first a shepherd.' But, as he had to confess, the Arabs of the 
desert were 'the most hardened in infidelity and hypocrisy'. 

Until recently, a bedouin who migrated within sight of Mecca 
would not think it worthwhile, even once in a lifetime, to 
circumambulate the shrines. Yet the Had), or 'Sacred Journey', 
was itself a 'ritual' migration: to detach men from their sinful 
homes and reinstate, if temporarily, the equality of all men 
before God. 

A pilgrim on the Hadj has resumed Man's first condition: 
if he dies on the Hadj he goes straight, as a martyr, to Heaven. 
Similarly, Il-Rah 'The Way' was first used as a technical term 
for 'road' or 'migration path' - before being adopted by the 
mystics to denote 'the Way to God.' 

The concept has its equivalent in the Central Australian 
languages where tjurna djugurba means 'the footprints of the 

Ancestor' and 'the Way of the Law'. 

It would seem there exists, at some deep level of the human 
psyche, a connection between 'path-finding' and 'law'. 

To the Arabian bedouin, Hell is a sunlit sky and the sun a 
strong, bony female — mean, old and jealous of life — who 
shrivels the pastures and the skin of humans. 

The moon, by contrast, is a lithe and energetic young man, 
who guards the nomad while he sleeps, guides him on night 
journeys, brings rain and distils the dew on plants. He has the 
misfortune to be married to the sun. He grows thin and wasted 
after a single night with her. It takes him a month to recover. 

The Norwegian anthropologist, Frederick Barth, writes of how 
the Basseri, another tribe of Iranian nomads, were, in the 1930s, 
forbidden by Reza Shah to move from their winter grazing 
ground. 

In 1941 , the Shah was deposed, and they were free once 
again to make the 300-mile journey to the Zagros. Free they 
were, but they had no animals. Their fine-fleeced sheep had 
suffocated on the southern plains: yet they set off all the same. 

They became nomads again, which is to say, they became 
human again. 'The supreme value to them,' wrote Barth, 'lay 
in the freedom to migrate, not in the circumstances that make 
it economically viable.' 

When Barth came to account for the dearth of ritual among 
the Basseri — or of any rooted belief - he concluded that the 
Journey itself was the ritual, that the road to summer uplands 
was the Way, and that the pitching and dismantling of tents 
were prayers more meaningful than any in the mosque. 

Raids are our agriculture. 
Bedouin proverb 

I against my brother 

I and my brother against our cousin 

I, my brother and our cousin against the neighbours 

All of us against the foreigner 

Bedouin proverb 

Alois Musil, the Arabist cousin of Robert, calculated in 1928 
that, among the Rwala bedouin, four-fifths of the men fell in 
war or vendettas or died from wounds received. 

Hunters, on the other hand, who practise an art of the minimum, 
deliberately limit their numbers and enjoy far greater 
security of life and land. Of the Central Australian native, 
Spencer and Gillen wrote that, though he might occasionally 
quarrel or fight, the idea of annexing fresh territory would 
never enter his head: an attitude to be explained 'by the belief 
that his Alcheringa (Dreamtime) ancestors occupied precisely 
the same country as he does now'. 

The pastoral ethic in Australia: 

Someone in the Department of Aboriginal Affairs - I think 
it was the Minister himself - has said that, in the Northern 
Territory, 'foreign-owned cattle' have more rights than Australian 
citizens. 

The pastoral ethic in Ancient Ireland: 

Since I took my spear in my hand, I have not been without 
killing a Connaught man every single day. 
Conall Cernach, an Ulster cattle-man 

Any nomad tribe is a military machine in embryo whose impulse, 
if not to fight other nomads, is to raid or threaten the 
city. 

Settlers, therefore, since the beginning of history, have recruited 
nomads as mercenaries: either to stave off a nomad 
threat, as the Cossacks fought the Tatars for the Tsars; or, if 
there were no nomads, to fight other States. 

In Ancient Mesopotamia, these 'mercenaries' first transformed 
themselves into a caste of military aristocrats, then into directors 
of the State. It can be argued that the State, as such, 
resulted from a kind of 'chemical' fusion between herdsman 
and planter, once it was realised that the techniques of animal 
coercion could be applied to an inert peasant mass. 

Apart from their role as 'Lords of the Fertilising Waters', the 
first Dictators called themselves 'Shepherds of the People'. In
deed, all over the world, the words for 'slave' and 'domesti
cated animal' are the same. The masses are to be corralled, 
milked, penned in (to save them from the human 'wolves' 
outside), and, if need be, lined up for slaughter. 

The City is thus a sheepfold superimposed over a Garden. 

A further possibility - not without application to the games 
theory of warfare — is that the army, any professional army  
or war department, is, without knowing it, a tribe of surrogate 
nomads, who have grown up inside the State; who prey off 
the State; without whom the State would crumble; yet whose 
restlessness is, finally, destructive of the State in that, like gadflies, 
they are forever trying to goad it into action. 

Hesiod's Works and Days provides a metaphorical model for 
the decline of man in relation to technological progress. His 
stages of human culture pass from the Ages of Gold to those 
of Silver, Bronze and Iron. The Bronze and Iron Ages were an 
archaeological reality, which Hesiod knew from experience 
and which had culminated in a crescendo of violence and strife. 

Obviously, he was unaware of 'Palaeolithic' and 'Neolithic', 
so the Gold and Silver Ages were conceived symbolically. Arranged 
in the reverse order of metallic perfection, they represent 
a degeneration from the incorruptible to the tarnished, 
the corroded and the rusty. 

The Men of the Golden Race, Hesiod says, lived in an age 
when Cronos, or 'Natural Time', ruled in Heaven. The earth 
provided them with abundance. They lived happy, carefree 
lives, wandering freely over their lands, without possessions, 
houses or war. They ate their meals in common, with one 
another and the immortal gods. They died with hands and feet 
unfailing as if sleep had come upon them. 

In the Christian era, Origen (Contra Celsum, iv, 79) would 
use Hesiod's text to argue that, at the beginning of human 
history, men were under supernatural protection, so there was 
no division between their divine arid human natures: or, to 
rephrase the passage, there was no contradiction between a 
man's instinctual life and his reason. 

In the part of Libya where the wild beasts are found live the 

Garamantes, who avoid all intercourse with men, possess no 
weapons of war, and do not know how to defend themselves. 

Herodotus, iv, 194 

Early Christians believed that, by returning to the desert, they 
could assume Our Lord's agony in the Wilderness. 

They wander in the deserts as if they were wild animals 
themselves. Like birds they fly about the hills. They forage 
like beasts. Their daily round is inflexible, always predictable,
for they feed on roots, the natural product of the Earth. 

From the Spiritual Meadow of St John Moscus, 
a description of hermits known as 'the Browsers' 
Every mythology remembers the innocence of the first state: 
Adam in the Garden, the peaceful Hyperboreans, the Uttarakurus 
or 'the Men of Perfect Virtue' of the Taoists. Pessimists 
often interpret the story of the Golden Age as a tendency to 
turn our backs on the ills of the present, and sigh for the 
happiness of youth. But nothing in Hesiod's text exceeds the 
bounds of probability. 

The real or half-real tribes which hover on the fringe of 
ancient geographies — Atavantes, Fenni, Parrossits or the dancing 
Spermatophagi - have their modern equivalents in the 
Bushman, the Shoshonean, the Eskimo and the Aboriginal. 

One characteristic of the Men of the Golden Age: they are 
always remembered as migratory. 

On the coast of Mauritania, not far from where the Meduse 
(of Gericault's Radeau de la Meduse) was wrecked, I saw the 
flimsy shelters of the Imraguen: a caste of fishermen who catch 
mullet in seine nets and enjoy, with cheerfulness and grace, 
the same pariah status as the Nemadi. 

Similar fishermen's huts will have stood on the shore of Lake 
Galilee: 'Come with me and I will make you fishers of men.' 

An alternative to the vision of the Golden Age is that of the 
'anti-primitivists': who believe that man, in becoming a hunter, 
became the hunter and killer of his kind. 

This is a very convenient doctrine if: a) you wish to murder 
others; b) you wish to take 'draconian' measures to prevent 
their murderous impulses from getting out of hand. 

Whichever way, the Savage must be seen as vile. 

In his Meditations on Hunting Ortega y Gasset makes the point 
that hunting (unlike violence) is never reciprocal: the hunter 
hunts and the hunted tries to escape. A leopard at the kill is 
no more violent or angry than an antelope is angry with the 
grass it eats. Most accounts of the hunters emphasise that the 
act of killing is a moment of compassion and reverence: of 
gratitude to the animal that consents to die. 

A 'bushie' in the pub at Glen Armond turned to me and said: 
'Want to know how the Blackfellows hunt?' 

'Tell me.' 

'Instinct.' 

IN ONE OF MY EARLIER notebooks I made painstaking copies 
from Sir George Grey's Journal, written in the 1830s. Grey was 
perhaps the first white explorer to understand that, despite 
occasional discomforts, the Aboriginals 'lived well'. 

The best passage in the Journal is a description of a 
Blackfellow straining all his physical and mental faculties to 
stalk and spear a kangaroo. 

The last paragraph winds into a coda: 

.. . his graceful movements, cautious advance, the air of 
quietude and repose which pervade his frame when his prey is 
alarmed, all involuntarily call forth your imagination and 
compel you to murmur to yourself, 'How beautiful! How 
very beautiful!' 

I fooled myself into believing that some of this 'beauty' must 
survive, even today. I asked Rolf to find a man to take me 
hunting. 

I had been sitting on my arse for a couple of weeks, and was 
beginning to feel the disgust for words that comes from taking 
no exercise. 

'The best man to go with', said Rolf, 'would be old Alex 
Tjangapati. He speaks some English.' 

Alex was an elderly man who wore his hair up in ochre-string 
and a lady's plum velvet overcoat with padded shoulders. I 
don't think he had anything on underneath. He went bushwalking 
every day, and, in the evenings, he'd hang about the 
store with his hunting spears, staring at the rest of the Cullen 
Mob as though they were the real canaille. 

When Rolf asked him to take me, Alex pulled a long, regretful 
face, and walked away. 

'Well, that', I said, 'is that.' 

'Never mind,' he said. 'We'll find someone else.' 

Around noon next day, Stumpy Jones drove the truck into 
Cullen. He was the first to make it through the flood. Even so, 
he'd got bogged for a day and a night this side of Popanji, and 
the Magellan Mining boys had to haul him out. 

There was a girl with him. She was the girlfriend of Don, the 
works manager. 'And she's a good girl,' said Stumpy, winking. 

She had cropped hair and a dirty white dress. Don seemed 
very pleased to see her, but she gave him a cool, appraising 
glance and continued to smile at Stumpy. 

'Right,' she said. 'I don't whinge about being bogged.' 

Don and I helped unload the crates off the truck. We had 
almost finished when Rolf came out. 
'You want to go hunting?'he called. 
'Yes,' I said. 
'You want to pay for a full tank of petrol?' 
'If that's what they want.' 
'I've fixed it.' 
'Who with?' 
'Donkey-donk,' he said. 'Good bloke!' 
'When?' 
'Now,' he said. 'You'd better go and get your boots on. And a 
hat!' 

I was walking across to the caravan when a rattletrap Ford 
Sedan came creaking and groaning up behind. At the wheel was 
a bearded Aboriginal with a big belly. 

'You going a-hunting?' he grinned. 

'With you?' 

'Man!' said Donkey-donk. 

We drove back to get the petrol but, the moment the tank was 
paid for, I realised my role in this expedition was not that of 
'client' but 'slave'. 

Donkey-donk made me buy extra oil, bullets, candy bars, 
cigarettes. He wanted me to buy him a new tyre. He made me 
hold his cigarette while he tinkered with the engine. 

We were all set to go when a young man called Walker 
strolled up. Walker was a great traveller. He'd travelled up and 
down Australia on a most fastidious search for a wife. He had 
also spent time in the Amsterdam YMCA. He was very 
beautiful. He had a godlike profile and very dark skin. His hair 
and beard were the colour of spun gold. 

'You want to come hunting?' Donkey-donk called to him. 

'Sure,' said Walker, and sat down in the back seat. 

We drove off to find the man who had the gun. He was 
another incredibly graceful young man, with a feckless smile 
and hair down to his shoulders. He was sitting outside a 
brushwood shelter. He had scrawled his name, 'Nero', in red 
ball-point all over his jeans. 

Nero's wife, it turned out, was the giantess I had watched 
playing poker. She was a good head taller than he, and about 
four times as wide. She was sitting behind her shelter, by the 
campfire, gnawing at a charred kangaroo ham. When Nero got 
into the car, their small son rushed after him, and did a high dive 
through the open window. The mother followed, waving her 
kangaroo-bone bludgeon. She dragged the boy out by the hair 
and spat in his face. 

We had been going a couple of minutes when Nero turned to 
the others. 

'Got the matches?' he asked. 

Donkey-donk and Walker shook their heads. We turned 
round to fetch some matches. 
'Smokes,' Nero grinned. 'Case we get bogged.' 
We headed south between Mounts Cullen and Liebler and 
dropped down towards the Gun Barrel Highway. After the rain, 
the scrub was breaking into yellow flowers. The track began 
and ended in a mirage, and the chain of rocky hills appeared to 
float above the plain. 

I pointed to a reddish outcrop on the left. 

'So what's that one?' I asked. 

'Old Man,' Walker volunteered brightly. 

'So where's this Old Man coming from?' 

'Come long way. Aranda Mob, maybe. Maybe Sydney.' 

'And where's he going to ?' 

'Port Hedland,' he said, decisively. 

Port Hedland is an iron-ore port on the coast of western 
Australia about 800 miles west of Cullen, beyond the Gibson 
Desert. 
'And what happens to that Old Man', I asked, 'when he gets 
to the sea?' 

'End of him,' said Walker. 'Finish.' 

I next pointed to a low, flat-topped hill which, Rolf had 
assured me, was a lump of shit the Perenty Man had shat in the 
Dreamtime. 

'And what about that one there?' 
Walker fumbled nervously with his beard. 
'I'm too young,' he said bashfully — by which he meant he had 
not been initiated into that particular song. 
'Ask Nero,' he went on. 'He knows it.' 
Nero sniggered and tilted his head from side to side. 
'Toilet Dreaming,' he said. 'Shit Dreaming.' 
Donkey-donk was splitting his sides with laughter and 
swerving all over the track. 
I turned to face the two on the back seat. 
'Perenty shit?' I asked. 
'No, no,' Nero giggled foolishly. 'Two Men.' 
'And where do those Two Men come from?' 
'Coming from nowhere,' he flapped his hands. 'Doing it 
there!' 
Nero made a sign with his thumb and forefinger making it all 
too plain what the Two Men were up to. 
'Brothers-in-law,' he said. 
Walker frowned, pursed his lips and pressed his knees tight 
together. 
'I don't believe you,' I said to Nero. 'You're having me on.' 
'He! He!' he laughed, and let fly another helpless peal of 
giggles. 

He and Donkey-donk were still snorting with laughter when, 
a mile or so farther on, we stopped by some low-lying rocks. All 
three jumped out of the car. 

'Come on,' Nero called to me. 'Water.' 
There were pools of stagnant water among the rocks and 
mosquito larvae wriggling about in them. 
'Tapeworms,' said Nero. 
'Not tapeworms,' I said. 'Mosquito larvae.' 
'Dingo,' said Donkey-donk. 
He gestured towards the largest rock, which really did look 
like a dog lying down. The smaller rocks, he said, were puppies. 
They splashed around in the water for several minutes. We 
then quit the track and headed west across country. 

Donkey-donk, I have to say, was an astounding driver. He 
put the car into a kind of dance through the spinifex. He knew 
exactly whether to swerve round a bush or flatten it. The seedheads 
showered on to the windscreen. 

Nero kept the barrel of his .22 sticking out of the window. 

'Turkey-track,' he whispered. 

Donkey-donk braked and a bush turkey - which is a kind of 
bustard - craned its mottled brown head above the grass stems
and made off at a trot. Nero fired, once, and the bird collapsed 
in a whirl of flying feathers. 

'Good shot!' I said. 

'Another one!' shouted Walker, and a second turkey ran on 
ahead into a thicket. Nero fired again, and missed. By the time 
we got back to the first turkey, it too had vanished. 

'Fuckin' turkey,' said Nero. 

We held our course to the west and, before long, a kangaroo 
and young leaped up in front of us. Donkey-donk put his foot 
on the accelerator and the car thumped and bounced over the 
tussocks with the kangaroos bounding on ahead, gaining. Then 
we were out of the spinifex into burnt and open country, and we 
were gaining, and we caught up and hit the mother in the 
haunches — the young one had veered off sideways - and she 
flew, in a backward somersault, over the roof of the car and 
landed - dead, I prayed! - in a cloud of dust and ash. 

We jumped out. Nero fired into the cloud, but the kangaroo 
was up and off, shaky, limping yet with a fair burst of speed and 
Donkey-donk, alone at the wheel now, at her tail. 

We watched the car slam into the kangaroo a second time, 
but she landed on the bonnet, jumped clear, and came bounding 
in our direction. Nero took a couple of swinging shots but 
missed—they zinged into the bush beside me - and the kangaroo 
zigzagged back the way she'd come. Donkey-donk then headed 
off and hit her a third time, with an awful thud, and this 
time she didn't budge. 

He opened the car door and clouted the base of her skull with 
a spanner — at which she reared up again on her haunches and he 
had to grab her by the tail. By the time we three ran up, the 
kangaroo was hopping forward and Donkey-donk was hanging 
on like a man in a tug-of-war, and then Nero put a shot through 
her head, and that was that. 


Walker looked disgusted and miserable. 

'I don't like it,' he said. 

'Nor do I,' I agreed. 

Nero contemplated the dead kangaroo. A stream of blood 
trickled from her nostrils on to the red earth. 
'Old one,' he shrugged. 'Not good for eat.' 
'What are you going to.do with her?' 
'Leave,' he said. 'Cut off tail, maybe. You got a knife?' 
'No,' I said. 
Nero rummaged in the car and found the lid of an old tin can. 

Using it as a blade, he tried to cut off the tail but couldn't saw 
through the vertebrae. 

The back left tyre had a flat. Donkey-donk commanded me to 
get out the jack and change the wheel. The jack was badly bent 
and, when I applied a few strokes of pressure, it snapped and the 
axle hit the dirt. 

'Now you done it,' he leered. 

'What do we do?'I asked. 

'Walk,' said Nero, with a titter. 

'How far?' 

'Two days, maybe.' 

'What about the smoke?' I suggested. 

'Nah!' growled Donkey-donk. 'Lift him! Lift him up, man!' 

Walker and I gripped the bumper, braced our backs, and tried 
to lift while Donkey-donk got ready with a log to shove under 
the differential. 

It was no use. 

'Come on,' I shouted at Nero. 'Give us a hand!' 

He cupped his fingers and ran them up and down one of his 
slender biceps, batting his eyelids and giggling. 

'No force!' he said, breathlessly. 

Donkey-donk handed me a digging-stick and ordered me to 
scoop out a hole beneath the wheel. Half an hour later, the hole 
was big enough to change the wheel. All three looked on as I 
worked. I was done in and drenched with sweat. We then 
rocked the car back and forth, and finally pushed it clear. 

We left the kangaroo to the crows and drove back to Cullen. 

'You want to come hunting tomorrow?' asked Donkey-donk. 

'No,' I said. 

London, 1970 

A T A PUBLIC LECTURE I listened to Arthur Koestler airing his 
opinion that the human species was mad. He claimed that, as 
a result of an inadequate co-ordination between two areas of 
the brain - the 'rational' neocortex and the 'instinctual' hypothalamus 
- Man had somehow acquired the 'unique, murderous, 
delusional streak' that propelled him, inevitably, to 
murder, to torture and to war. 

Our prehistoric ancestors, he said, did not suffer from the 
effects of overcrowding. They were not short of territory. They 
did not live in cities . . . yet they butchered one another just 
the same. 

He went on to say that, since Hiroshima, there had been a 
total transformation of the 'structure of human consciousness': 
in that, for the first time in his history, Man had to contemplate 
the idea of his destruction as a species. 

This millenarian claptrap made me quite angry. At question 
time I stuck up my hand. 

Around the year 1000,1 said, people all over Europe believed 
that a violent end of the world was imminent. How was the 
'structure of their consciousness' any different from our own? 

Koestler fixed me with a contemptuous stare and, to the 
approval of the audience, snapped: 

'Because one was a fantasy and the H-Bomb is real.' 

Salutary reading for the end of the Second Millennium: Henri 
Focillon's L'An mil. 

In his chapter 'The Problem of the Terrors', Focillon shows 
how, exactly one thousand years ago, Western man was paralysed 
by the same set of fears being put about today by the 
bigots who pass for statesmen. The phrase 'Mundus senescit,' 
'The world grows old,' reflected a mood of dire intellectual 
pessimism, as well as a 'religious' conviction that the world 
was a living body which, having passed the peak of its maturity, 
was doomed, suddenly, to die. 

The sources of the Terror were threefold. 

 That God would destroy his creation in clouds of fire 
and brimstone. 

2 That the legions of the Devil would erupt out of the East. 
3 That epidemics would wipe out the human race. 

And yet the Terror passed. The year iooo came and went, 
and the new 'open' society of the Middle Ages took root. As 
Bishop Glaber wrote, in the loveliest of lines, 'Three years after 
the year iooo, the Earth was covered with a white robe of 
churches.' 

Dinner party, London, 1971 

A very tall American came to dinner. He was on his way to 
Washington from a fact-finding mission in Vietnam. Over the 
past week he had flown to Hawaii, to Guam, to Tokyo and 
Saigon. He had overflown Hanoi on a bombing raid. He had 
conferred with NATO chiefs-of-staff - and this was his one 
night off. 

He was an innocent man. Over salad he spoke of defoliants. 
I shall not forget the sight of raspberries passing between his 
lips, nor the thud of stressed syllables coming out of them: 'The 
North Vietnamese have lost between a half and a third of a 
generation of their young fighting men. This is a loss no nation 
can afford to sustain indefinitely: which is why we anticipate a 
military victory, in Vietnam, in the course of 197 2 . . .' 

Do not press an enemy at bay. 

Prince Fu Ch'ai said, 'Wild beasts, when at bay, fight 

desperately. How much more is this true of men! If they 

know there is no alternative, they will fight to the death. 

Sun Tzu, The Art of War 

Steiermark, Austria, 1974 

Hiking in the Rottenmanner Tauern before my interview with 
Lorenz, my rucksack weighted with his books. The days were 
cloudless. I spent each night in a different Alpine hut, and had 
sausages and beer for supper. The mountainsides were in flower: 
gentians and edelweiss, columbines and the turk's cap lily. The 
pinewoods were blue-green in the sunlight, and streaks of snow 
still lingered on the screes. On every meadow there were mild 
brown cows, the cowbells clanking and echoing across the 
valleys, or the chime of a church bell far below . . . 

Holderlin's line, 'In lovely blueness blooms the steeple with 
its metal roof . . .' 

The hikers: men and women in red-and-white shirts and 
lederhosen and everyone calling 'Griiss Gott!' as they passed. 
One knotty little man mistook me for a German and, with the 
leer of a pornography salesman, reversed his jacket collar to 
show me his swastikas. 

Re-reading Lorenz made me realise why sensible people tended 
to throw up their hands in horror: to deny there was such a 
thing as human nature, and to insist that everything must be 
learnt. 

'Genetic determinism', they felt, threatened every liberal, 
human and democratic impulse to which the West still clung. 
They recognised, too, that you couldn't pick and choose with 
instincts: you had to take the lot. You couldn't allow Venus 
into the Pantheon and bolt the door on Mars. And once you 
took on 'fighting', 'territorial behaviour' and 'rank order', you 
were back in the soup of nineteenth-century reaction. 

What, in On Aggression, caught the fancy of the Cold War 
warriors was Lorenz's concept of 'ritual' combat. 

The Superpowers, by implication, must fight because it is in 
their nature to fight: yet could perhaps contain their squabbles 
in some poor, small, preferably defenceless country — just as 
two bucks will choose a patch of no-man's land to spar on. 

The US Secretary of Defence, I was told, kept an annotated 
copy by his bedside. 

Men are products of their situation, and learning conditions 
everything they will ever say or think or do. Children are 
traumatised by events in their childhood; nations by crises in 
their history. But could this 'conditioning' mean there are no 
absolute -standards which transcend historical memories? No 
'rights' or 'wrongs' regardless of race or creed? 

Has the 'gift of tongues' somehow done away with instinct? 
Is Man, in short, the proverbial 'blank slate' of the behaviourists 
- infinitely malleable and adaptive? 

If so, then all the Great Teachers have been spouting hot air. 

The most 'objectionable' passage in On Aggression — or the one 
that led to catcalls of 'Nazi!' — is one in which Lorenz describes 
the instinctive 'fixed motor pattern' observable in young soldiers 
roused to battle fury: the head held high . . . chin stuck out. . . 
the arms rotated inwards .. . the shiver down the now nonexistent 
hair along the spine .. . : 'One soars elated above the 
cares of everyday life . . . Men enjoy the feeling of absolute 
righteousness even when they commit atrocities . . .' 

And yet. . . the mother who fights in fury to defend her child 
is — one would hope! — obeying the call of instinct, not the 
advice of some maternal guidance leaflet. And if you allow the 
existence of fighting behaviour in young women, why not also 
in young men? 

Instincts are Pascal's 'reasons of the heart of which the reason 
knows nothing'. And to believe in the 'reasons of the heart' 
holds no comfort whatsoever for the reactionary — very much 
the reverse! 

Without religion, in Dostoevsky's famous formulation, everything 
is permissible. Without instinct, everything would be 
equally permissible. 

A world shorn of instinct would be a far more deadly and 
dangerous place than anything the 'aggression-mongers' could 
come up with, for here would be Limbo-land where everything 
could be capped by something else: good could be bad; sense, 
nonsense; truth, lies; knitting no more moral than child murder; 
and where a man might be brainwashed into thinking or saying 
or doing whatever might be pleasing to the powers-that-be. 

A torturer can cut off a man's nose; but if the man gets a 
chance to breed, his child will be born with a nose. So with 
instinct! A core of unmodifiable instinct in man means that 
the brainwashers must begin their work of distortion over and 
over again, with each individual and each generation — and 
this, in the end, is a very wearisome business. 

The Greeks believed there were limits to the range of human 
behaviour: not, as Camus pointed out, that these limits would 
never be surpassed, simply that they existed, arbitrarily; and 
that whoever had the hubris to exceed them would be struck 
down by Fate! 

Lorenz maintains there are certain crises — or instinctual rubicons 
— in the life of any animal when it receives a call to behave 
in a certain way. The call is not necessarily taken up; for if 
the 'natural' target of its behaviour is missing, the animal will 
redirect it on to a substitute — and grow up warped. 

Every mythology has its version of the 'Hero and his Road of 
Trials', in which a young man, too, receives a 'call'. He travels 
to a distant country where some giant or monster threatens to 
destroy the population. In a superhuman battle, he overcomes 
the Power of Darkness, proves his manhood, and receives his 
reward: a wife, treasure, land, fame. 

These he enjoys into late middle age when, once again, the 
clouds darken. Again, restlessness stirs him. Again he leaves: 
either like Beowulf to die in combat or, as the blind Tiresias 
prophesies for Odysseus, to set off for some mysterious destination, 
and vanish. 

'Catharsis': Greek for 'purging' or 'cleansing'. One controversial 
etymology derives it from the Greek katbeiro 'to rid the 
land of monsters'. 

Myth proposes, action disposes. The Hero Cycle represents an 
unchangeable paradigm of 'ideal' behaviour for the human 
male, (One could, of course, work one out for the Heroine.) 

Each section of the myth — like a link in a behavioural chain 
- will correspond to one of the classic Ages of Man. Each Age 
opens with some fresh barrier to be scaled or ordeal to be 
endured. The status of the Hero will rise in proportion as to 
how much of this assault course he completes - or is seen to 
complete. 
Most of us, not being heroes, dawdle through life, mis-time our 
cues, and end. up in our various emotional messes. The Hero 
does not. The Hero - and this is why we hail him as a hero takes 
each ordeal as it comes, and chalks up point after point. 

I once made the experiment of slotting the career of a modern 
hero, Che Guevara, on to the structure of the Beowulf epic. The 
result was, with a bit of tinkering here and there, that both heroes 
are seen to perform the same set of exploits in the same sequence: 
the leavetaking; the voyage across the sea; the defeat of the 
Monster (Grendel—Batista); the defeat of the Monster's mother 
('The water-hag' - the Bay of Pigs). Both heroes receive their 
reward: a wife, fame, treasure (in Guevara's case a Cuban wife 
and the Directorship of the National Bank of Cuba), and so 
forth. Both end up dying in a distant country: Beowulf killed 
by the Scaly Worm, Guevara by the Dictator of Bolivia. 

As a man, Guevara, for all his charm, strikes one as a ruthless 
and unpleasant personality. As a Hero, he never put a foot 
wrong - and the world chose to see him as a Hero. 

Heroes in moments of crisis are said to hear 'angel voices' 
telling them what to do next. The whole of the Odyssey is a 
marvellous tug of war between Athene whispering in Odysseus's 
ear, 'Yes, you'll make it,' and Poseidon roaring, 'No, you won't!' 
And if you swap the word 'instinct' for 'angel-voice', you come 
close to the more psychologically-minded mythographers: that 
myths are fragments of the soul-life of Early Man. 

The Hero Cycle, wherever found, is a story of 'fitness' in the 
Darwinian sense: a blueprint for genetic 'success'. Beowulf 
leaves . . . Ivan leaves . . . Jack leaves . . . the young Aboriginal 
on Walkabout leaves . . . even the antique Don Quixote leaves. 
And these Wanderjabre, and combats with the Beast, are the 
story-teller's version of the incest taboo; whereby a man must 
first prove 'fitness' and then must 'marry far'. 

In practice, it scarcely matters whether myths are the coded 
messages of instinct, whose structures will reside in the central 
nervous system, or tales of instruction handed down from the 
Year Dot. One point cannot be emphasised too strongly. Seldom, 
if ever, in myth, is it desirable, morally, for a man to kill 
a man in cold blood. 

Among the military fraternities of Ancient Germany a young 
man, as part of his training to stifle inhibitions against killing, 
was required to strip naked; to dress himself in the hot, freshly 
flayed skin of a bear; to work himself into a 'bestial' rage: in 
other words, to go, quite literally, berserk. 

'Bearskin' and 'berserk' are the same word. The helmets of 
the Royal Guards, on duty outside Buckingham Palace, are the 
descendants of this primitive battle costume. 

Homer distinguishes two kinds of 'fighting behaviour'. One is 
menos, the cold-blooded stand of Odysseus as he shoots the 
suitors. The other is lyssa, or 'wolfish rage', such as possesses 
Hector on the battlefield (Iliad ix, 237-9). A man in the thrall 
of lyssa is thought to be no longer 'human', or subject to the 
laws of earth and Heaven. 

Lorenz's 'militant fighting enthusiasm' is a description of 
lyssa. 

The Sioux Indians are a set of miserable dirty lousy blanketed 
thieving lying sneaking murdering graceless faceless gut-eating 
SKUNKS as the Lord ever permitted to infect the earth, and 
whose immediate and final extermination all MEN, excepting 
Indian agents and traders, should pray for. 

From the Topeka Weekly Daily, 1869 

The stranger, if he be not a trader, is an enemy. 
Old English 

The Middle Latin wargus - i.e. 'expulsus' or 'stranger', is 
also the same as the wolf; and thus the two conceptions that 
of the wild beast to be hunted down, and that of the 
man to be treated as a wild beast - are intimately associated. 

P. J. Hamilton Grierson, The Silent Trade 
Nuristan, Afghanistan, 1970 

The villages of Nuristan are set at so vertiginous an angle to 
the mountainsides that ladders of deodar wood must serve the 
function of streets. The people have fair hair and blue eyes, 
and carry battle-axes made of brass. They wear pancake hats, 
cross-gartering on their legs, and a dollop of kohl on each 
eyelid. Alexander mistook them for a tribe of long-lost Greeks, 
the Germans for a tribe of Aryans. 

Our porters were a cringing lot, forever complaining that 
their poor feet could carry them no farther and casting envious 
eyes on our boots. 

At four o'clock they wanted us to camp beside some sunless 
and broken houses, but we insisted on moving up the valley. 
An hour later, we came to a village surrounded by walnut trees. 
The roof-tops were orange, from apricots drying in the sun, and 
girls in rose-madder dresses were playing in a field of flowers. 

The village headman welcomed us with a frank and open 
smile. We were then joined by a bearded young satyr, his hair 
wreathed in vine leaves and meadow-sweet, who offered us 
from his leather flask a thread of sharp white wine. 

'Here,' I said to the leading porter, 'we will stop.' 

'We will not stop,' he said. 

He had learnt his English in the Peshawar bazaar. 

'We will stop,' I said. 

'These people are wolves,' he said. 

'Wolves?' 

'They are wolves.' 

'And the people of that village ?' I asked, pointing to a second, 
dejected-looking village about a mile upstream. 

'They are people,' he said. 

'And the village beyond that? Wolves, I suppose?' 

'Wolves,' he nodded. 

'What nonsense you do talk!' 

'Not nonsense, sahib,' he said. 'Some people are people and 
some other people are wolves.' 

It does not take too much imagination to suppose that man, 
as a species, has suffered some tremendous ordeal in his evolutionary 
past: the fact that he scraped through so brilliantly 
is a measure of the magnitude of the threat. 

To prove this is another matter. Yet, already twenty years 
ago, I felt that far too much attention was being paid to our 
supposedly 'fratricidal' tendencies and too little to the role of 
the Carnivore in shaping our character and destiny. 

If one had to give a general answer to the question, 'What 
do carnivores eat?' it would be a very simple one, 'What 
they can get.' 

Griff Ewer, The Carnivores 

It has been said of the Kadars, a hunting tribe of southern 
India, that they were strangers to violence or displays of virility 
because they channelled all their antipathies outwards on to 
the tiger. 

Suppose, for the sake of argument, you cut all the loose talk 
of 'aggression' and focused on the problem of 'defence'. What 
if the Adversary, on the plains of Africa, had not been the other 
man? Not the men of the other tribe? What if the adrenal 
discharges that precipitate 'fighting fury' had evolved to protect 
us from the big cats? What if our weapons were not, primarily, 
for hunting game, but for saving our skins? What if we were 
not so much a predatory species as a species in search of a 
predator? Or if, at some critical watershed, the Beast had been 
about to win? 

Here — let there be no mistake — lies the great divide. 

If the first men had been brutish, murderous, cannibalistic, 
if their rapacity had driven them to acts of extermination and 
conquest, then any State, by providing an umbrella of force, 
will have saved men from themselves and must, inevitably, be 
considered beneficial. Such a State must, however frightful for 
the individual, be counted a blessing. And any action by individuals 
to disrupt, weaken or threaten the State will be a 
step in the direction of primaeval chaos. 

If, on the other hand, the first men themselves were humbled, 
harried, besieged, their communities few and fragmented, forever 
gazing at the horizon whence help might come, clinging 
to life and one another through the horrors of the night might 
not all the specific attributes we call 'human' - language, 
song-making, food-sharing, gift-giving, intermarriage — this is 
to say, all the voluntary graces which bring equipoise to society, 
which suppress the use of force among its members; and which 
can only function smoothly if equivalence is the rule — might 
not all these have evolved as stratagems for survival, hammered 
out against tremendous odds, to avert the threat of extinction? 
Would they, therefore, be any less instinctual or directionless? 
Would not a general theory of defence explain more readily 
why offensive wars are, in the long run, unfightable? Why the 
bullies never win? 

Altenberg, Austria, 1974 

It was too hot in Lorenz's study and we moved into a summerhouse 
in the garden. Above the town towered the mediaeval 
castle of Greiffenstein: a bastion.of Christian Europe against 
the shifting world of Asiatic horsemen. Seeing him on his own 
ground made me realise that his views on fighting must, in 
some way, be coloured by having been brought up at the centre 
of a tremendous geopolitical drama. 

Why was it, I asked him, that so many people still found 
the theory of instinct, as applied to man, unstomachable? 
'There are certain things,' he said, 'with which one simply 
cannot cope, and one of them is plain stupidity.' 

'Please stop me if I'm wrong,' I said, 'but when, in any 
animal, you isolate a "bloc" of behaviour, the first question 
to ask is "What for?" How would this or that have helped to 
preserve the species in its original habitat?' 

'True,' he nodded. 

'A robin,' I said, alluding to one of his experiments, 'on 
seeing another robin, or even a piece of red fluff, will move 
into the attack, because red says "territorial rival".' 

'He will.' 

'So the trigger which releases fighting in a robin is the sight 
of its own kind?' 

'Of course.' 

'Well, why, when it comes to fighting among men, must one 
or other of the fighters be not quite human? Don't you think 
that "militant enthusiasm", as you describe it, might have evolved 
as a defensive reaction against the wild beasts?' 

'It could be,' he answered thoughtfully. 'It could very well 
be. Before hunting a lion, the Masai in Kenya drum up fighting 
enthusiasm quite artificially, like a Nazi music march . . . Yes. 
Fighting may have developed primarily against the wild beasts. 
Chimps, at the sight of a leopard, do the whole collective 
aggression stunt beautifully.' 

'But surely,' I persisted, 'haven't we got the concepts of 
"aggression" and "defence" mixed up? Aren't we dealing with 
two entirely separate mechanisms? On the one hand you have 
the "aggressive" rituals which, in the case of human beings, 
are gift-giving, treaty-making and kinship arrangements. Then 
you have "defence", surely against the Beast?' 

All war propaganda, I went on, proceeded on the assumption 
that you must degrade the enemy into something bestial, infidel, 
cancerous, and so on. Or, alternatively, your fighters must 
transform themselves into surrogate beasts — in which case 
men became their legitimate prey. 

Lorenz tugged at his beard, gave me a searching look and 
said, ironically or not I'll never know: 
'What you have just said is totally new.' 

ONE MORNING, AS I was having breakfast with Rolf and Wendy, 
a tall shirtless figure came ambling towards us. 
'We're honoured,' Rolf said. 'Big Foot Clarence. Chairman of 
the Cullen Council.' 

The man was dark-skinned and rather pear-shaped, and his 
feet were enormous. I gave him my chair. He sat down, 
scowling. 

'So how's you?' Rolf asked. 
'Right,' said Clarence. 
'Good.' 
'They passed the budget in Canberra,' Clarence said, in a flat 
disinterested voice. 
'Oh, yes.' 
'Yep,' he said. 'We've got the plane.' 
For over two years now, the Cullen Council had been angling 

for a plane. 
'Yep,' Clarence repeated. 'We've got the plane now. Thought 

I'd tell you.' 
'Thanks, Clarence.' 
'Thought I'd go to Canberra Thursday,' he said. 'Thought I'd 

come back in the plane.' 
'You do that,' said Rolf. 
Clarence got to his feet and was walking away when Rolf 

called him back. 
'Clarence,' he said. 
'Yep.' 
'Clarence, what have you done with the grader?' 
'What grader?' 
'The Popanji grader.' 
'Don't know no Popanji grader.' 
'Yes, you do,' Rolf said. 'The grader Red Lawson lent you.' 

'When?' 

'Last year,' he said. 'You and your mates went hunting on that 
grader. Remember?' 
'No.' 
'Well, Red's coming over to fetch the grader. I suggest you find 
it, Clarence. Or they might deduct the cost from the plane.' 

'Dunno nothing about a grader,' Clarence sneered, angrily, 
and stamped off. 
I caught Wendy's eye. She was trying not to giggle. 
'That plane', Rolf turned to me, 'is going to be trouble.' 
It was all very well to give them a plane, another thing to pay for 

its upkeep. None of the Cullen Mob saw the least point in having 
a plane unless they had the plane right there. That meant paying a 
pilot to live at Cullen. It also meant a child-proof hangar. 

At the Amadeus Settlement, Rolf continued, the pilot had been 
a nice guy who liked to take the kids for a spin. Kids of eight and 
ten, and they soon got wise to the plane's control systems. They 
watched where he kept his keys, in a locked drawer in his 
caravan, and managed to nick them while he was taking a nap. 

'He woke', Rolf said, 'to watch the aircraft moving down the 
runway.' 

'They took off?' 

'Not quite,' he said. 'Overshot the strip and landed in some 
bushes. The plane was a near wreck.' 
It was still cool and bright in the early morning. 
'I thought I'd go for a walk today,' I said. 
We were expecting Arkady any day and, each morning, at 
work in the caravan, I promised myself a walk up Mount Liebler. 

'Take water,' said Rolf. 'Take three times the water you think 
you need.' 
I pointed out the way I planned to climb. 
'Don't worry,' he said. 'We've got trackers who'd find you in a 

couple of hours. But you must take the water.' 

I filled my water flask, put two extra bottles in my rucksack, 
and set out. On the edge of the settlement, I passed a lady's 
handbag hanging from a tree. 

I walked over a plateau of sandhills and crumbly red rock, 
broken by gulches which were difficult to cross. The bushes had 
been burnt for game-drives, and bright green shoots were 
sprouting from the stumps. 

I was climbing steadily, and, looking down at the plain, I 
understood why Aboriginals choose to paint their land in 
'pointillist' dots. The land was dotted. The white dots were                        
spinifex; the blueish dots were eucalyptus, and the lemon-green 
dots were some other kind of tufty grass. Iunderstood, too, better 
than ever, what Lawrence meant by the 'peculiar, lost weary 
aloofness of Australia'. 

A wallaby got up and went bounding downhill. I then saw, on 
the far side of the chasm, something big in the shade of a tree. At 
first Ithought it might be a Giant Red, until I realised it was a man. 

I shinned up the far side to find Old Alex, naked, his spears 
along the ground and his velvet coat wrapped in a bundle. I 
nodded and he nodded. 

'Hello,' I said. 'What brings you here?' 
He smiled, bashful at his nakedness, and barely opening his 
lips, said: 'Footwalking all the time all over the world.' 

I left him to his reverie and walked on. The spinifex was thicker 
than ever. At times I despaired of finding a way through, but 
always, like Ariadne's thread, there was a way through. 

I next fell for the temptation — the temptation of touching a 
hedgehog—to put my hand on a clump: only to find my palm was i 
stuck with spines an inch or so before I'd expected. As I picked | 
them out, I remembered something Arkady had said, 'Every-:il 
thing's spiny in Australia. Even a goanna's got a mouthful of |j 
spines.'

I clambered up the screes of the escarpment and came out on a i 
knife edge of rock. It really did look like the perenty lizard's 
tail. Beyond, there was a tableland with some trees along a driedup 
watercourse. The trees were leafless. They had rumpled grey 
bark and tiny scarlet flowers that fell to the ground like drops of 
blood. 

I sat, exhausted, in the half-shade of one of these trees. It was 
infernally hot. 

A short way off, two male butcher birds, black and white like 
magpies, were calling antiphonally across a ravine. One bird 
would lift his beak vertically and let out three long whooping 
notes, followed by three ascending shorts. The rival would then 
pick up the refrain, and repeat it. 

'Simple as that,' I said to myself. 'Exchanging notes across a 
frontier.' 

I was lying spreadeagled against the tree-trunk with one leg 
dangling over the bank, swigging greedily from the water flask. I 
now knew what Rolf meant by dehydration. It was madness to 
go on up the mountain. I would have to go back the way I'd 
come. 

The butcher birds were silent. Sweat poured over my eyelids 
so that everything seemed blurred and out of scale. I heard the 
clatter of loose stones along the bank, and looked up to see a 
monster approaching. 

It was a giant lace-monitor, the lord of the mountain, Perenty 
himself. He must have been seven feet long. His skin was pale 
ochre, with darker brown markings. He licked the air with his 
lilac tongue. I froze. He clawed his way forward: there was no 
way of telling if he'd seen me. The claws passed within two 
inches of my boot. Then he turned full-circle and, with a sudden 
burst of speed, shot off the way he'd come. 

The perenty has a nasty set of teeth, but is harmless to man 
unless cornered: in fact, apart from scorpions, snakes and 
spiders, Australia is exceptionally benign. 

All the same the Aboriginals have inherited a bestiary of 
monsters and bugaboos: with which to menace their children, 
or torment young men at initiation time. I remembered Sir 
George Grey's description of the Boly-yas: a flap-eared apparition, 
more stealthily vengeful than any other creature, which 
would consume the flesh, but leave the bones. I remembered the 
Rainbow Snake. And I remembered Arkady talking about the 
Manu-manu: a fanged, yeti-like creature which moved underground, 
prowled the camps at night, and made off with unwary 
strangers. 

The first Australians, I reflected, will have known real 
monsters such as the Tbylacaleo, or 'marsupial lion'. There was 
also a perenty lizard thirty feet long. Yet there was nothing in 
the Australian megafauna to contend with the horrors of the 
African bush. 

I fell to wondering whether the violent edge of Aboriginal life 

— the blood-vengeance and bloody initiations —might stem from 
the fact of their having no proper beasts to contend with. 
I dragged myself to my feet, climbed across the ridge, and 
looked down over Cullen settlement. 
I thought I could see an easier way down, which would avoid 
having to cross the gulches. This 'easy way' turned out to be a 
rock-slide, but I arrived at the bottom in one piece and walked 
home along a streambed. 

There was a trickle of water in the stream, and bushes 
grew along it. I splashed some water over my face, and 
walked on. I had raised my right leg to take a step forward and 
heard myself saying, 'I am about to tread on something that 
looks like a green pine-cone.' What I had not yet seen was the 
head of the king-brown, about to strike, rearing up behind a 
bush. I put my legs into reverse and drew back, very slowly . . . 
one . . . two . . . one . . . two. The snake also withdrew, and 
slithered off into a hole. I said to myself, 'You're being very 
calm' - until I felt the waves of nausea. 

I got back to Cullen at half past one. 

Rolf looked me up and down and said, 'You look quite 
shattered, mate.' 

ROCK-A-BYE, baby, on the tree top, 

When the wind blows, the cradle will rock. 

When the bough breaks, the cradle will fall, 

And down will come baby, cradle and all. 

That man is a migratory species is, in my opinion, born out 
by an experiment made at the Tavistock Clinic in London and 
described by Dr John Bowlby in his Attachment and Loss. 

Every normal baby will scream if left alone; and the best 
way of silencing these screams is for the mother to take it in 
her arms and rock or 'walk' it back to contentment. Bowlby 
rigged up a machine which imitated, exactly, the pace and 
action of a mother's walk; and found that, providing the baby 
was healthy, warm and well-fed, it stopped crying at once. 
'The ideal movement,' he wrote, 'is a vertical one with a traverse 
of three inches.' Rocking at slow speeds, such as thirty cycles 
a minute, had no effect: but once you raised the pace to fifty and 
above, every baby ceased to cry and almost always stayed quiet. 

Day in, day out, a baby cannot have enough walking. And if 
babies instinctively demand to be walked, the mother, on the 
African savannah, must have been walking too: from camp to 
camp on her daily foraging round, to the waterhole and on 
visits to the neighbours. 

Apes have flat feet, we have sprung arches. According to Professor 
Napier, the human gait is a long, lilting stride -i . . . 
2, .. . i .. . 2 — with a fourfold rhythm built into the action 
of the feet as they come into contact with the ground -1,2 , 
3, 4 ... 1, 2, 3, 4 .. . : heel strike; weight along the outside 
of the foot; weight transferred to the ball of the foot; pushoff 
with big toe. 

The question occurs to me - and quite seriously — how many 
shoe soles, how many ox-hide soles, how many sandals 
Alighieri wore out in the course of his poetic work, wandering 
about on the goat paths of Italy. 

The Inferno and especially the Purgatorio glorify the hu
man gait, the measure and rhythm of walking, the foot and 
its shape. The step, linked to the breathing and saturated with 
thought: this Dante understands as the beginning of prosody. 
Osip Mandelstam, Conversations about Dante, 
trans. Clarence Brown 

Melos: Greek for 'limb', hence 'melody'. 

And think this slow-pac'd soule . . . 
John Donne, 'The Second Anniversarie' 

A white explorer in Africa, anxious to press ahead with his 
journey, paid his porters for a series of forced marches. But 
they, almost within reach of their destination, set down their 
bundles and refused to budge. No amount of extra payment 
would convince them otherwise. They said they had to wait 
for their souls to catch up. 

The Bushmen, who walk immense distances across the Kalahari, 
have no idea of the soul's survival in another world. 
'When we die, we die,' they say. 'The wind blows away our 
foot prints, and that is the end of us.' 

Sluggish and sedentary peoples, such as the Ancient Egyptians 

— with their concept of an afterlife journey through the Field 
of Reeds — project on to the next world the journeys they failed 
to make in this one. 
London, 1965 

The man who came to supper with Mr Rasikh was a scrubbed 
and balding Englishman, pink as a healthy baby and in his 
middle sixties. He had sandy-to-greying sideburns and clear 
blue eyes. His name was Alan Brady. You could tell at a glance 
he was a very happy man. 

Mr Rasikh was the official buyer in London for the Sudanese 
government. He lived in a flat on top of a tower block in 
Victoria. He had a hennaed beard, and wore white jalabiyas and 
a floppy white turban. He was never off the phone collecting 
punters' tips for horses, and apparently never went out. Occasionally, 
you heard the sound of his women in another room. 

His friend Brady was a travelling salesman for a firm that 
made typewriters and office equipment. He had customers in 
about thirty African countries and, every four months, would 
visit each in turn. 

He said he preferred the company of Africans to white men. 
It was a pleasure to do business with them. People said Africans 
were impossible to deal with, always wanting something for 
nothing. 

'But, let me tell you,' Brady said to me, 'they're a whole lot 
easier than my colleagues in the office.' 

In twenty years of trading, he had had two bad debts. He 
never took a holiday. He was unafraid of revolutions, or African 
airlines. 

He came to London three times a year, never for more than 
a week, and would stay in the bunk-room the company set 
aside for its travellers. Because he had no winter clothes, he 
tried to time these visits to avoid the worst of the weather: in 
November, in March and again in July. 

Apart from the clothes he stood up in, he owned no possessions 
other than a spare tropical suit, a spare tie, a pullover, three 
shirts, underwear, socks, slippers, an umbrella and a sponge-bag. 
Everything fitted into a suitcase he could carry as hand-baggage. 

'I don't believe in wasting time at airports,' he said. 

Every time he returned to London, he went to a tropical 
outfitter's off Piccadilly and completely re-equipped himself: 
suitcase, umbrella, clothes and all. He gave the rejects to the 
office porter, who made a few pounds on them. 

'Nothing,' he said proudly, 'wears out on Alan Brady.' 
He had neither English friends, nor family. Mr Rasikh's flat 
was the one place in London where he felt at ease. 

His father had been gassed on the Somme, his mother had died 
during the week of Dunkirk. Sometimes, in the summers, he used 
to visit her grave, in a village churchyard near Nottingham. He 
had once had an aunt in Wigan, but now she too had died. 

He was past retiring age. There were murmurings among 
the office staff that it was time for him to go: but his order 
book was always full, and the management kept him on. 

'Don't you have a base?' I asked him. 'Don't you have anywhere 
you could call "home"?' 
He blushed with embarrassment. 'I do,' he faltered. 'It is 
rather private.' 

'I'm sorry,' I said. 'Forget it.' 

'Not that I'm ashamed of it,' he went on. 'Only some people 
might think it silly.' 
'Not me,' I said. 
He said that, in the office safe, he kept an old solicitor's 
black tin deed box, the kind with 'The Estate of Sir Somebody 
So-and-So' in white lettering. 
Whenever he came to London, he would lock himself in the 
bunk-room and spread the contents over the mattress. 

In the bottom of the box he kept the bric-a-brac salvaged 
from an earlier existence: his parents' wedding photo; his father's 
medals; the letter from the King; a teddy bear; a Dresden 
kingfisher that had been his mother's favourite; her garnet 
brooch; his swimming trophy (by 1928, he no longer had 
attacks of bronchial asthma); his silver ashtray 'for twentyfive 
years' loyal service' to the firm. 

In the top half of the box, separated by a layer of tissue 
paper, he kept his 'African' things - worthless things, each the 
record of a memorable encounter: a Zulu carving bought off 
a sad old man in the Drakensbergs; an iron snake from Dahomey; 
a print of the Prophet's Horse, or a letter from a boy 
in Burundi thanking him for the present of a football. Each 
time he brought back one new thing, and chucked out one old 
thing that had lost its significance. 

Alan Brady had only one fear: that soon they would make 
him retire. 

If every newborn baby has an appetite for forward motion, 
the next step is to find out why it hates lying still. 
Penetrating further into the causes of anxiety and anger in 
the very young, Dr Bowlby concluded that the complex instinctual 
bond between a mother and her child — the child's 
screams of alarm (quite different to the whimperings of cold 
or hunger or sickness); the mother's 'uncanny' ability to hear 
those screams; the child's fear of the dark, and of strangers; 
its terror of rapidly approaching objects; its invention of nightmarish 
monsters where none exist; in short, all those 'puzzling 
phobias' which Freud sought to explain but failed, could, in 
fact, be explained by the constant presence of predators in the 
primaeval home of man. 

Bowlby quotes from William James's Principles of Psychology, 
'The greatest source of terror in childhood is solitude.' A solitary 
child, kicking and yelling in its cot, is not, therefore, 
necessarily showing the first signs of the Death Wish, or of the 
Will to Power, or of an 'aggressive drive' to bash its brother's 
teeth in. These may or may not develop later. No. The child 
is yelling - if you transpose the cot on to the African thornscrub 

— because, unless the mother comes back in a couple of minutes, 
a hyena will have got it. 
Every child appears to have an innate mental picture of the 
'thing' that might attack: so much so that any threatening 
'thing', even if it is not the real 'thing', will trigger off a predictable 
sequence of defensive behaviour. The screams and 
kicks are the first line of defence. The mother must then be 
prepared to fight for the child; and the father to fight for them 
both. The danger doubles at night, because man has no night 
vision and the big cats hunt at night. And surely this most 
Manichaean drama — of light, darkness and the Beast — lies at 
the heart of the human predicament. 

Visitors to a baby ward in hospital are often surprised by the 
silence. Yet if the mother really has abandoned her child, its 
only chance of survival is to shut its mouth. 

As PROMISED, RED LAWSON drove into Cullen to look for the 
missing grader. He came in the police vehicle; and to impress on 
the Cullen Mob the seriousness of his intentions, he was fully 
togged up, in khaki, with all the insignia of his rank and a hat 
strapped purposefully under his chin. His socks were stretched 
to bursting over his calves. 

In the afternoon he made a round of the humpies, but drew a 
blank. No one had heard of the grader. No one knew what a 
grader was: except for Clarence the Chairman, who flew into 
a rage and said he'd confused Cullen with some place else. Even 
Joshua acted dumb. 

'Now what?' Red asked Rolf. 
He was sitting on a packing-case inside the store, mopping 
the sweat from his forehead. 
'Let's wait for old Alex,' said Rolf. 'He'll know. And from 
what I know of him, he'll hate the grader and want it out.' 
Alex, as usual, was bushwalking but was bound to be back at 
sunset — and he was. 
'Leave this one to me,' said Rolf, who went over to talk to 
him. 
Alex listened. Then, with the faintest grin, he pointed a bony 
finger towards the north-east. 

Red's passion for Spinoza began to make better sense at 
supper when he told us that his mother was an Amsterdam 
Jewess. She, alone of her family, had survived the Nazi 
occupation, cooped in the attic of some Gentile neighbours. 
When the brutes had gone and she was free to walk the streets, 
she had the sensation she must either die — or go far away. She 
met an Australian soldier, who was kind to her and asked her to 
be his wife. 

Red was aching to talk about Spinoza, but to my shame, I'd 
only dipped into The Ethics and our conversation was a series of 
halting non sequiturs. My performance, plainly, was not a 
patch on Arkady's. 

Next morning Red and I, and a man he'd brought from 
Popanji, set out to look for the grader. We crawled across 
country in the direction Alex had pointed. Whenever we came 
to higher ground, Red would stop and reach for his binoculars. 

'Not a sign of the bugger!' he said. 
We then drove through a gap between two low-lying hills: on 
the far side we shouted simultaneously, 'Grader tracks!' 

They had been having fun! For miles ahead the landscape was 
churned up into circles, loops and figures of eight. But no matter 
how many times we drove round this ridiculous maze, there was 
still no sign of the grader. 

'I think I'm going crazy,' said Red. 

At that moment I glanced at a conical hillock to our right. 
Perched on top of it was the huge yellow thing. 
'Look!' I shouted. 
'Christ!' said Red. 'How the hell did they get it up there?' 
We climbed the hill and found the grader, rusty, paint peeling 
in slabs, a bush growing up through the engine, poised with one 
wheel in the air, above a very steep bank. Incredibly, the tyres 
were hard. 

Red checked the tank, which was half-full. He checked the 
self-starter, which was out. He then checked the slope to make 
sure there were no hidden dangers, and reckoned we could 
probably jump-start her. 

'Clever so-and-sos,' he grinned. 'Knew exactly what they 
were doing!' 

The metal of the machine was infernally hot. Red presented 
me with a pair of heat-resistant gloves and a spray-can. My role 
in this operation was, without etherising myself, to spray ether 
into the carburettor. 

I wrapped a handkerchief round my nose. Red climbed into 
the driver's seat. 

'Ready?' he called. 

'Ready!'I answered. 

He released the brake and the grader eased forward with a 
swish of breaking branches. I pressed the nozzle of the spray-
can and hung on for dear life as, suddenly, we hurtled down the 
slope and the engine came alive with a roar. Red skilfully steered 
the machine on to level ground, and braked. He turned to me 
and gave the thumbs up sign. 

He ordered the man from Popanji to take the wheel of the 
police vehicle. I rode behind on the cab of the grader. Within a 
mile or so of Cullen, I shouted above the din, 'Could you do me 
a big favour? Could I drive her?' 

'Sure!' said Red. 

I drove the grader into the settlement. There was no one 
about. I parked on a slope behind Rolf's caravan. 

Now, if I saw the 'other' Bruce in Alice, I'd be able to say, 'I 
didn't drive a dozer, Bru. But I drove a grader.' 

No COUNTRY ABOUNDS in a greater degree with dangerous 
beasts than Southern Africa. 
Charles Darwin, The Descent of Man 

But where there is danger there grows also what saves. 
Friedrich Holderlin, Patmos 

Koestler's rant about the original 'bloodbath' made me realise 
he must have read, at first- or second-hand, the work of Raymond 
Dart. Dart was the young Professor of Anatomy of Witwatersrand 
University in Johannesburg who, in 1924, had 
recognised the significance of the Taung Child - a spectacular 
fossil skull from Cape Province — and had gone on to give it 
the tongue-twisting name Australopithecus africanus, the 'African 
Southern Ape'. 

He deduced, correctly, that the creature had stood about 
four foot high; that it had walked erect, more or less like a 
man; and though the brain of a fully grown specimen could 
hardly have been larger than a chimpanzee's, it had human 
characteristics none the less. 

The discovery of this 'missing link', he insisted (to the sneers 
of 'experts' in England), bore out Darwin's prediction that 
man had descended from the higher apes in Africa. 

He also believed the 'child' had been bashed to death with 
a blow over the head. 

Dart, a Queenslander of bush-farming stock, belongs to the 
generation of the First World War; and though he only witnessed 
mopping-up operations in 1918 , he seems to have held 
the disillusioned view: that men enjoy killing other men, and 
will go on killing indefinitely. 

Certainly, by 1953, with fresh evidence from a cave on 
the fringe of the Kalahari, he felt compelled - in a paper 
entitled 'The Predatory Transition from Ape to Man' - to 
share his belief that our species had emerged from its simian 
background because we were killers and cannibals; that the 
Weapon had fathered the Man; that all subsequent history 
revolved around the possession and development of superior 
weapons; and that, by implication, men must adjust their 
society to its weapons rather than weapons to the needs of 
society. 

Dart's disciple, Robert Ardrey, was moved to rank the paper 
alongside The Communist Manifesto in its long-term effects 
on ideology. 

In 1947—8, while excavating the Makapansgat Limeworks Cave 
— itself an eerie place where the Voortrekkers once massacred 
a tribe of Bantus — Dart had uncovered what he took to be 
the 'kitchen midden' of a band of Australopithecines, who, 
'like Nimrod long after them', had been mighty hunters. 
Although they had eaten eggs, crabs, lizards, rodents and 
birds, they had also butchered antelopes in quantity, to say 
nothing of far larger mammals: a giraffe, a cave bear, the hippo, 
the rhino, the elephant, the lion, two kinds of hyena - in 
addition to which, mixed up among the 7,000-odd bones, were 
a lot of baboon skulls minus the skeletons, and the remains of 
a cannibal feast. 

From the fossils Dart selected one particular specimen: 'the 
fractured lower jaw of a 12-year-old son of a man-like ape': 

The lad had been killed by a violent blow delivered with great 
accuracy on the point of the chin. The bludgeon blow was so 
vicious that it had shattered the jaw on both sides of the face 
and knocked out all the front teeth. That dramatic specimen 
impelled me in 1948 and the seven years following to study 
further their murderous and cannibalistic way of life. 

Which he did. He began by comparing the bone assemblage 
from Makapansgat with those of Taung and Sterkfontein (the 
latter, a cave site near Pretoria); and between 1949 and 1965 
he published a total of thirty-nine papers elaborating his theory 
of an Osteodontokeratic (bone-tooth-horn) tool culture for 

Australopithecus. 

The picture he drew of our immediate ancestors revealed 
them to have been right-handed; that their favourite weapon 
had been a bludgeon made from the distal end of an antelope 
humerus; that for daggers they had used horns or slivers of 
sharpened bone, for saws jawbones, for picks the canine teeth 
of carnivores; and that a mass of other bones had been smashed 
for the extraction of marrow. 

Noticing, too, that the tail vertebrae were almost invariably 
missing, Dart suggested these had been waved about as flails 
or whips or signalling flags. Also, because the skulls of both 
baboon and Australopithecus appeared to have been deliberately 
mutilated, he suggested the occupants of the cave had 
been 'professional head-hunters'. He concluded: 

The blood-bespattered, slaughter-gutted archives of human 
history, from the earliest Egyptian or Sumerian records to 
the most recent atrocities of the Second World War, accord 
with early universal cannibalism, with animal and human 
sacrificial practices or their substitutes in formalised religion 
and worldwide scalping, head hunting, body mutilating and 
necrophilic practices in proclaiming this common bloodlust 
differentiator, this predaceous habit, this mark of Cain that 
separates man dietetically from his anthropoidal relatives 
and allies him rather with the deadliest carnivora. 

The style alone suggests that something is seriously wrong. 

Berkeley, California, 1969 

In the People's Park, I was buttonholed by a hippie, prematurely aged. 
'Stop the killing!' he said. 'Stop the killing!' 
'You wouldn't by any chance,' I said, 'think of telling a tiger 

to chew cud?' 
I got up, ready to run for it. 
'Shit!' he shouted. 
'Think of Hitler!' I shouted back. 'Think of Rudolph Hess! 

Always snooping in each other's vegie picnic-baskets.' 

The number of murders committed during Lent is greater, 
I am told, than at any other time of the year. A man under 
the influence of a bean dietary (for this is the principal food 
of the Greeks during their fasts) will be in an apt humour 
for enriching the shrine of his Saint, and passing a knife 
through his next-door neighbour. 

A. W. Kinglake, Eothen 
Witwatersrand University, Johannesburg, 1983 

Professor Raymond Dart's ninetieth birthday party in the Department 
of Anatomy. The old man was swinging about a 
haematite dumb-bell with which he hoped to keep his frontal 
lobes in shape. In a clangorous voice, he explained how to be 
right-handed was to be left-brained: yet if you exercised both 
hands equally, you exercised both halves of the brain. 

Two black students dipped their biscuits delicately in their 
tea cups, and giggled. 

After the party, two of Dart's junior colleagues took me along 
the passage to see the Taung Child. What an object! You had 
the impression of a very wise little person staring at you down 
the ages through a pair of binoculars. 

The damage to the skull, they said, had nothing to do with 
violence. Before fossilisation, it had simply been squashed by 
the compacting layers of breccia. 

They also allowed me to handle the boy's 'broken jaw' from 
Makapansgat. It was greyish-black, not from being cooked but 
from magnesium staining. Again, they said, the damage can 
only have been caused by 'shearing', as a result of subsidence 
in the strata. 

So much for the barrage of nonsense raised on the evidence 
of these two specimens. 

Swartkrans, Transvaal 

With 'Bob' Brain for a day's excavation at the Swartkrans 
Cave: he has been working here for nineteen seasons. Standing 
above the cave shaft, I looked in one direction across a sweep 
of grassy hills towards the High Veldt, in the other at the 
glinting roofs of the Sterkfontein site and, beyond, the mountainous 
spoil-heap of the Krugersdorp Mine. 

The surface of the ground was broken by small jagged boulders, 
which made walking very difficult. There was a scarlet 
aloe in flower but there were no trees or, rather, no trees on 
the plain. Yet, inside the cave mouth, a stinkwood reared its 
spotted trunk, its leaves giving shade to the excavation. Only 
in protected places can seedlings survive the bushfires and frost. 

Brain showed me the breccia which has yielded so many 
fossils of the muscular, 'King-Kong-like' form of Australopithecus, 
A. robustus: a creature known to have co-existed in 
this valley with the first man, Homo habilis, more than two 
million years ago. 

The foreman, George, was a seasoned excavator. He would 
dig out one cubic foot at a time, and pass the contents through 
a griddle. Brain would take each fragment of bone, and scrutinise 
it under a glass. 

In the heat of the day, we rested inside his hut. On the 
bookshelf was a copy of Sir Thomas Browne's Religio Medici. 
It was here that Brain wrote the greater part of his book, The 
Hunters or the Hunted? — the most compelling detective story 
I have ever read. 

Brain, the Director of the Transvaal Museum in Pretoria, is a 
quiet, meditative, self-effacing man of ascetic convictions and 
limitless patience. His father was an English entomologist who 
went out to Rhodesia to work in pest control. His mother was 
Afrikaans. He is the great-great nephew of Eugene Marais, the 
poet, naturalist and recluse, whose Soul of the White Ant was 
plagiarised by Maeterlinck. 

Brain has defined the true naturalist as 'a man who is in love 
with the world', and believes the only way of approaching 
nature is to try and see things the way they are 'without filters'. 
He is haunted by the fragility of human life, and always looking 
for ways of preserving it. 

He hates being locked into any one discipline and has, at 
one time or another — with a kind of 'Taoist' abnegation — 
immersed himself in zoology, geology, prehistory and climatology. 
He has written on the behaviour of monkeys; on geckoes; 
on chameleons; and on the side-winding adder of the Narnib 
Desert. Once he has finished with Swartkrans, he intends to 
go back to protozoa — 'those single-celled bundles of vitality', 
to be found in the most brackish desert wells, and which eat, 
reproduce and die within the space of a few hours. 

As a young man, in 1955, Brain attended the Third Panafrican 
Congress of Prehistory and heard Raymond Dart expounding 
his views on the Bloodbath. He felt that man, as a species, was 
being libelled - and he was perhaps the only person present 
who knew why. 

He had, it happened, been working as a soil geologist on 
the breccias of Makapansgat and doubted that Dart was justified 
in interpreting every scrap of bone in the cave as a tool 
or weapon. Besides, although murder and cannibalism did occur, 
sporadically, throughout the animal kingdom - usually as 
a response to overcrowding or stress - the idea that murder 
made man made no evolutionary sense. 

For ten years, Brain mulled over Dart's thesis; and, on becoming 
Director of the Museum, he decided to take the matter 
in hand. 

In the Sterkfontein valley there are three dolomitic limestone 
caves where hpminid fossils have been found: Sterkfontein itself, 
Swartkrans and Kromdraai. Once he had satisfied himself 
that conditions here were essentially the same as at Makapansgat, 
he set to work. 

Each of the caves is filled with a breccia of bone and sediment 
which has squashed down in layers over a period of two to 
three million years. The bones vary in size from those of an 
elephant to those of a mouse. Among them are several species 
of extinct baboon and two forms of Australopithecus: at Sterkfontein, 
the earlier, 'gracile' A. africanus; at Swartkrans and 
Kromdraai, its descendant, the muscular A. robustus. 

There are also the bones, not many, of man.1 

Some of these hominid bones do show unmistakable signs 
of a violent end. If it could be shown that other hominids had 
brought them into the cave, they would have to face the charges 
of murder and cannibalism. If not, not. 

Brain subjected about 20,000 bones to a meticulous 'forensic' 
examination: to decide how each one found its way into the 
cave and how it came to be in its present condition. Some 
bones were perhaps washed in by floodwaters. Some were 
brought there by porcupines, which are known to hoard bones 
and sharpen their teeth on them. The smaller rodents will have 
arrived in owl pellets. The bones of the larger mammals elephant, 
hippo, lion — will probably have been the work of 
scavenging hyenas. 

But none of this alters the general picture: that all three 
caves were the lairs of carnivores, and that the overwhelming 
majority of bones had belonged to animals which had been 
killed outside the cave, and dragged 'home' to be eaten in the 
darkness. The fossils represented the discarded food remains. 

It is unnecessary to go over the ingenuity of Brain's method: 
except to point out that all those antelope bones which Dart 
claimed were bludgeons and daggers and so forth were precisely 
those parts of the skeleton which a big cat would leave 
after its meal. 

As for the scarcity of hominid fossils - other than the skull 
and jawbones — Brain observed how, while eating a baboon, 
a cheetah will crunch up most of the skeleton, except the extremities 
and the skull. The slight 'mutilation' sometimes found 
at the base of the skull was explained by the animal's habit of 
breaking the braincase at its weakest point (the foramen magnum) 
and then licking out the contents. 

A primate skeleton is that much more fragile and digestible 
than that of an antelope. 

All big cats kill with a neck bite - in common with the executioner's 
axe, the guillotine and the garrotte. In his Reflections 
on the Guillotine, Camus records how his father, a solid petit 
bourgeois of Oran, was so outraged by a gruesome murder 
that he went to the man's public guillotining - and came away 
vomiting helplessly. 

The sensation of being mauled by a big cat may, as we know 
from Dr Livingstone's experience with a lion, be slightly less 
horrific than one imagined, 'It causes,' he wrote, 'a kind of 
dreaminess, in which there was no sense of pain nor feeling of 
terror. It was like what patients under chloroform describe 
who see all the operation but feel not the knife . . . This peculiar 
state is probably produced in all animals killed by the carnivores; 
and, if so, is a merciful provision by our benevolent 
creator for lessening the pain of death.' 

Missionary Travels 

Transvaal Museum, Pretoria 

An afternoon with Dr Elizabeth Vrba, a palaeontologist, Brain's 
chief assistant — and a spellbinding talker! We sat on the floor 
of the so-called Red Room and handled, with white gloves, 
such famous fossils as 'Mrs Pies': an almost complete skull of 
africanus found by the late Robert Broom in the 1930s. 
To have in one hand the delicate jawbone of africanus and 
in the other the huge grinding molars of robustus was like 
handling the horseshoe of a Shetland pony and that of a Shire 
horse. 

The Sterkfontein Valley fossils are all late compared to those 
of Kenya and Ethiopia, where the archaic, midget form of 
Australopithecus, A. afarensis (the type specimen is 'Lucy'), is 
now believed to have been walking upright around six million 
years ago. The earliest 'South Africans' are, on present showing, 
about half that age. 

Elizabeth Vrba showed me how the three forms of Australopithecus 
represent three stages in an evolutionary chain, becoming 
bigger and more muscular in answer to progressively 
drier and more open conditions. 

At what point the first man splits off from this line is a 
question the experts are going to argue ad infinitum. Every 
fieldworker wants to find HIM. But, as Brain warned, 'To find 
a beautiful fossil, and then hitch your reputation to it, is no 
longer to see the fossil.' 

The fact is that, at a date some time after 2.5 million, there 
appears in eastern Africa a small, agile creature with a very 
startling development to his frontal lobes. In all three stages 
of Australopithecus, the proportion of body to brain stays 
constant. In man, there is a sudden explosion. 

Elizabeth Vrba has written a series of internationally acclaimed 
papers on the rates of evolutionary change. It was she who 
sharpened my awareness of the debate between the 'gradualists' 
and the 'jumpers'. 

Orthodox Darwinians believe that evolution proceeds in a 
stately continuum. Each generation will differ imperceptibly 
from its parents; and when the differences are compounded, 
the species crosses a genetic 'watershed' and a new creature, 
worthy of a new Linnaean name, comes into being. 

The 'jumpers', on the other hand — in keeping with the brutal 
transitions of the twentieth century — insist that each species 
is an entity with an abrupt origin and an abrupt end; and that 
evolution proceeds in short bursts of turmoil followed by long 
periods of idleness. 

Most evolutionists believe that climate is a motor of evolutionary 
change. 

Species, on the whole, are conservative and resistant to change. 
They will go on and on, like partners in a shaky marriage, 
making minor adjustments here and there, until they reach a 
bursting point beyond which they cannot cope. 

In a climatic catastrophe, with its habitat fragmenting all 
around, a small breeding community may get hived off from its 
fellows and stranded in an isolated pocket, usually at the far end 
of its ancestral range, where it must transform itself or die out. 

The 'jump' from one species to the next, when it does come, 
comes quickly and cleanly. Suddenly, the new arrivals no longer 
reply to old mating calls. In fact, once these 'isolating mechanisms' 
take hold, there can be no genetic backsliding, no loss 
of new features, no going back. 

Sometimes the new species, invigorated by the change, may 
re-colonise its former haunts, and replace its predecessors. 

The process of 'jumping' in isolation has been called 'allopatric 
speciation' ('in another country') and will explain why, whereas 
biologists find countless variations within a species — in body 
size or pigmentation — no one has ever found an intermediate 
form between one species and the next. 

The search for the origin of man may thus turn out to be a 
hunt for a chimera. 

The necessary isolation required for 'jumping' can, it seems, 
equally well exist along a migration path or track - which is, 
after all, an area of territory spun out into a continuous line, 
as one would spin a fleece into yarn. 

Reflecting on the above, I was struck by the similarity between 
'allopatry' and the Aboriginal myths of creation: in which 
each totemic species is born, in isolation, at one particular 
point on the map, and then spreads out in lines across the 
country. 

All species must 'jump' eventually, but some jump more readily 
than others. Elizabeth Vrba showed me graphs on which she 
had plotted the lineage of two sister clades of antelopes, the 
Alcephalini and Aepycerotini, both of which shared a common 
ancestor in the Miocene. 

The Alcephalini, the family to which the wildebeeste and hartebeeste 
belong, have 'specialised' teeth and stomachs for feeding 
in arid conditions, and have thrown up about forty species over 
the past six and a half million years. The impala, a member of 
the Aepycerotini, being a generalist with a capacity to thrive in 
a variety of climates has remained the same to this day. 

Evolutionary change, she said, was once hailed as the hallmark 
of success. We now know better: the successful are the 
ones that last. 

The really important news is that we belong to a most stable 
lineage. 

The ancestors of man were 'generalists': resilient and resourceful 
creatures who, over the same period as the impala, 
will have had to wriggle out of many a tight corner without 
having to speciate at every turn. It follows that when you do 
find a major architectural change in the hominid line, there 
must be some ferocious external pressure to account for it. 
Also, that we may have a far more rigid moral, instinctive 
backbone than we hitherto suspected. 

Since the close of the Miocene, there have, in fact, been only 
two such major 'leaps forward', separated one from the other 
by an interval of roughly four million years: the first associated 
with Australopithecus, the second with man: 

The restructuring of the pelvis and foot from those of a 
brachiating forest ape to those of a walker on the plain; 
from a four-limb to a two-limb plan; from a creature 
that moved with its hands to one whose hands were free 
for other things. 

The rapid expansion of the brain. 

Both 'leaps', it turns out, coincide with sudden shifts towards 
a colder and drier climate. 

Around ten million years ago, our hypothetical ancestor, the 
Miocene ape, will have spent his days in the high-canopy rain 
forest which covered most of Africa at the time. 

Like the chimpanzee and gorilla, he will probably have spent 
each night in a different spot, yet confined his wanderings to 
a few unadventurous square miles of territory, where food was 
always available, where the rain fell in runnels down the treetrunks 
and sunlight then spattered the leaves; and where he 
could swing to safety from the 'horrors' on the forest floor. 

(From Lake Ternefine in Chad I have seen the fossil skull of 
a Miocene hyenid: an animal the size of a bull with jaws to 
slice off the leg of an elephant.) 

At the close of the Miocene, however, the trees began to 
dwindle in size. For reasons as yet unclear, the Mediterranean 
seems to have absorbed about 6 per cent of the world's oceanic 
salt. Because of the decrease in salinity, the seas around Antarctica 
began to ice up. The size of the ice cap doubled. The 
sea level fell; and the Mediterranean, cut off by a land-bridge 
at Gibraltar, became one vast evaporating salt-pan. 

In Africa, the rain forest shrank to small pockets - where the 
arboreal apes are at present to be found — while over the eastern 
side of the continent, the vegetation became a 'mosaic savannah': 
of open woodland and grass country, with alternating seasons 
of wet and dry, plenty and want, floodwater and lakes of cracked 
mud. This was the 'home' of Australopithecus. 

He was an animal that walked and probably carried loads: 
upright walking, with its development of the deltoid muscle, 
seems to presuppose the bearing of weights, probably food and 
children, from one place to another. Yet his broad shoulders, 
long arms, and marginally prehensile toes suggest that, in his 
'archaic' form at least, he still lived partly or took refuge in 
the trees. 

In the 1830s Wilhelm von Humboldt, the father of modern 
linguistics, suggested that man walked upright because of discourse 
which would not then 'be muffled or made dumb by 
the ground'. 

Yet four million years of upright walking had no effect whatever 
on the development of speech. 

All the same, the 'graciles' and the 'robusts' had, it seems, the 
ability to fashion simple tools, of bone and even stone. The 
wear on these tools, when examined under a microscope, suggests 
they were used, not for butchery, but for rooting up bulbs 
and tubers. Australopithecus may have snaffled a young gazelle 
if one came within his grasp. He may even have hunted, systematically, 
like a chimpanzee. But he was still more or less 
vegetarian. 

As for the first man, he was an omnivore. His teeth are those 
of an omnivore. From the stone tools strewn around his campsites, 
he seems to have dismembered carcasses and eaten them. 
He was, however, probably more scavenger than hunter. His 
appearance coincides with the second climatic upheaval. 

Climatologists have learnt that, between 3.2 and 2.6 million 
years ago, there occurred a sharp plunge in world temperature 
known as the First Northern Glaciation, in that the North 
Polar Ice Cap for the first time froze. In Africa, the results were 
catastrophic. 

Up and down the Great Rift Valley, the woodlands were 
swept away and replaced by open steppe: a wilderness of sand 
and gravel, patchy grass and thorn bushes, with taller trees 
lingering in the watercourse. 

Thornscrub was the country into which the brain of the first 
man expanded: the Crown of Thorns was not an accidental 
crown. 

'Man,' said Elizabeth Vrba, 'was born in adversity. Adversity, 
in this case, is aridity.' 

'You mean that man was born in the desert?' 

'Yes,' she said. 'The desert. Or at least the semi-desert.' 

'Where the sources of water were always undependable?' 

'Yes.' 

'But there were plenty of beasts about?' 

'A carnivore doesn't care where he lives so long as he gets 
his meat. It must have been terrible!' 

The evolutionary record is full of 'arms races' between predator 
and prey, since Natural Selection will favour prey with the best 
defences and predators with the best killing equipment. 

A tortoise retires into its shell. A hedgehog raises its spines. A 
moth will camouflage itself against the bark of a tree, and a 
rabbit will bolt down a burrow too small for the fox to follow; 
but man was defenceless on a treeless plain. The response of 
robustus was to put on more muscle. We used our brains. 

It was nonsense, Dr Vrba continued, to study the emergence 
of man in a vacuum, without pondering the fate of other species 
over the same time-scale. The fact was that around 2.5 million, 
just as man took his spectacular 'jump', there was a 'tremendous 
churning over of species'. 

'All hell,' she said, 'broke loose among the antelopes.' 

Everywhere in eastern Africa, the more sedentary browsers 
gave way to 'brainier' migratory grazers. The basis for a sedentary 
existence was simply no longer there. 

'And sedentary species,' she said, 'like sedentary genes, are 
terribly successful for a while, but in the end they are selfdestructive.' 

In arid country, resources are never stable from one year to 
the next. A stray thunderstorm may make a temporary oasis 
of green, while only a few miles off the land remains parched 
and bare. To survive in drought, therefore, any species must 
adopt one of two stratagems: to allow for the worst and dig 
in; to open itself to the world and move. 

Some desert seeds lie dormant for decades. Some desert rodents 
only stir from their burrows at night. The weltwitchia, 
a spectacular, strap-leaved plant of the Namib Desert, lives for 
thousands of years on its daily diet of morning mist. But migratory 
animals must move — or be ready to move. 

Elizabeth Vrba said, at some point in the conversation, that 
antelopes are stimulated to migrate by lightning. 

'So,' I said, 'are the Kalahari Bushmen. They also "follow" 
the lightning. For where the lightning has been, there will be 
water, greenery and game.' 

When I rest my feet my mind also ceases to function. 

J. G. Hamann 
The linguistic ability of Homo habilis may have been limited 
to grunts and howls and hisses: we shall never know. A brain 
does not survive the process of fossilisation. Yet its contours 
and lineaments do leave their imprint inside the skull. Casts 
can be taken; and these 'endocasts' be set beside one another, 
and compared. 

Paris, Musee de 1'Homme, 1984 

In his meticulous office, Professor Yves Coppens - one of the 
most lucid minds in the fossil man business — had lined up a 
series of such endocasts; the moment he passed from Australopithecus 
to man, I had a sense of something startling and 
new. 

Not only does the brain increase in size (by almost half), 
but also in shape. The parietal and temporal regions — the seats 
of sensory intelligence and learning - are transformed and 
become far more complex. Broca's Area, a region known to 
be inseparable from speech co-ordination, makes its first ap
pearance. The membranes thicken. The synapses multiply: as 
do the veins and arteries which irrigate the brain with blood. 

Inside the mouth, too, there are major architectural changes, 
especially in the alveolar region where the tongue hits the palate. 
And since man is by definition the Language Animal, it is 
hard to see what these changes are about unless they are for 
language. 

The subsequent stages of human evolution - through Homo 
erectus to H. sapiens sapiens - do not, in Coppens's view, 
warrant the status of a separate species. Rather, they should 
be seen as transformation of the original model: Homo habilis. 

'Long experience of Homo habilis,' he writes in Le Singe, 
I'Afrique et I'homme, 'has led me to believe that it is to him 
we should address the question: Who are we? Where have we 
come from? Where are we going? His sudden triumph seems 
so brilliant, so extraordinary and so new, that I would gladly 
choose this species, and this part of the world, to situate the 
origin of memory and language.' 

'I know this may sound far-fetched,' I said to Elizabeth Vrba, 
'but if I were asked, "What is the big brain for"?, I would be 
tempted to say, "For singing our way through the wilderness." ' 

She looked a bit startled. Then, reaching for a drawer in her 
desk, she fished out a watercolour: an artist's impression of a 
family of the First Men, and their children, tramping in single 
file across an empty waste. 

She smiled and said, 'I also think the hominids migrated.' 

Who, then, was the killer in the cave? 

Leopards prefer to eat their kill in the darkest possible recesses. 
And at an early stage of his inquiry, Brain believed it 
was they who were responsible for the carnage: which, indeed, 
they may have been, in part. 

Among the fossils in the Red Room he showed me the incomplete 
calvarium of a young male Homo habilis. Towards 
the front of the skull there are the marks of a brain tumour: 
so he may have been the idiot of the band. On the base, there 
are two neat holes about an inch apart. Brain then took the 
fossil skull of a leopard found in the same stratum and showed 
me how the lower canines fit perfectly into the two holes. A 
leopard drags its kill by fastening its jaws around the skull, as 
a cat will carry a mouse. 

The holes were in exactly the right position. 

Bhimtal, Kumaon, India 

One afternoon, I walked over to see the Shaivite saddhu in his 
hermitage on the opposite hill. He was a very saintly person, 
who took my offering of a few rupees and wrapped them, 
reverentially, in the corner of his orange robe. He sat crosslegged 
on his leopard-skin. His beard flowed over his knees 
and, while he boiled the water for tea, the cockroaches crawled 
up and down it. Below the hermitage there was a leopard cave. 
On moonlit nights the leopard would come into the garden, 
and he and the saddhu would look at each other. 

But the older people in the village could recall with horror 
the time of the 'man-eaters', when no one was safe, even behind 
bolted doors. 

At Rudraprayag, to the north of here, a man-eater ate more 
than 125 people before Jim Corbett shot him. In one case, the 
beast battered down the door of a stable; crawled over or under 
the bodies of forty live goats without touching a single one; 
and finally grabbed the young goatherd, asleep, by himself, in 
the farthest corner of the hut. 

Transvaal Museum 

A leopard will turn 'man-eater' usually — though not always 
- as a result of an accident, such as a missing canine. But once 
the animal gets a taste for human flesh, it will touch no other. 
When Brain came to tot up the percentages of primate fossils: 
that is, of baboons and hominids, both in the 'robust' level at 
Swartkrans and the africanus level at Sterkfontein, he found to 
his astonishment that primate bones accounted for 52.9 per 
cent and 69.8 per cent of the total prey spectrum. Antelopes and 
other mammals made up the rest. Whichever beast (or beasts) 
used the caves as its charnel-house, it had a taste for 'primate'. 
Brain toyed with the idea that 'man-eating' leopards had 
been at work; but there were several snags to this hypothesis: 

1 Statistics from African game-parks show that baboons 
account for no more than 2 per cent of a normal leopard's 
diet. 

2 In the upper levels at Swartkrans, when the cave was 
definitely tenanted by leopards, they left plentiful remains 
of their usual prey, the springbok, while baboons 
are down to 3 per cent. 

Was it possible that leopards had passed through an 'abnormal' 
man-eating phase — and then returned to their previous 
habits? 

Besides, when Elizabeth Vrba came to analyse the bovid bones 
from the caves, she found a preponderance of animals, such 
as the giant hartebeeste, too hefty for a leopard to cope with. 
Some other, more powerful carnivore must have been at work. 
Which? 

There are three principal candidates, all now extinct, all of 
whom have left their fossils in the Sterkfontein Valley. 

a The long-legged hunting hyenas, Hyenictis and Euryboas. 
b The macheirodonts, or sabre-tooth cats, 
c The genus Dinofelis, 'the false sabre-tooth'. 

The sabre-tooths had huge neck muscles and a powerful 
leap; and in their upper jaws they had scythe-like canines, 
serrated along the cutting edge, which, with a downward thrust, 
they would plunge into the neck of their prey. They were 
especially adapted for felling large herbivores. Their carnassial 
teeth were more efficient as meat-slicers than those of any other 
carnivore. Yet their lower jaws were weak: so weak that they 
were unable to finish off a skeleton. 

Griff Ewer once suggested that the bone-crushing molars of 
the hyena had evolved in answer to the plentiful supply of 
uneaten carcasses which sabre-tooths left behind. 

Obviously, the Sterkfontein Valley caves were occupied by a 
variety of carnivores, over a very long stretch of time. 

Brain felt that a proportion of the bones, especially those of 
the larger antelopes, could have been brought there by the 
sabre-tooths and hyenas, working in tandem. The hunting 
hyenas, too, might have been responsible for bringing in some 
hominids. 

But let us pass to the third alternative. 

Dinofelis was a cat less agile than a leopard or cheetah but far 
more solidly built. It had straight, dagger-like killing teeth, 
midway in form between a sabre-tooth's and, say, the modern 
tiger's. Its lower jaw could slam shut; and since, with its slightly 
cumbersome build, it must have hunted by stealth, it must also 
have hunted by night. It may have been spotted. It could have 
been striped. It might, like a panther, have been black. 

Its bones have been unearthed from the Transvaal to Ethiopia: 
that is, the original range of man. 

In the Red Room, I've just held in my hands a fossil skull of 
Dinofelis, a perfect specimen, patinated treacly brown. I made 
a point of articulating the lower jaw and staring steadily into 
the fangs as I closed them. 

The skull comes from one of three complete Dinofelis skeletons 
— a male, a female and a 'boy' — which were found 
fossilised along with eight baboons and no other animals at 
Bolt's Farm, a short way from Swartkrans, in 1947—8. Their 
finder, H. B. S. Cooke, suggested that the Dinofelis 'family' 
had been out baboon hunting, when they had all fallen into 
some natural pit, and all died together. 

A strange end! But no stranger than the still unanswered 
questions: Why, in these caves, were there so many baboons 
and hominids? Why so few antelopes and other species? 

Brain puzzled over the possibilities with his habitual caution, 
and, tentatively, in the final paragraphs of The Hunters or the 
Hunted? put forward two complementary hypotheses. 

The hominids might not have been dragged into the cave: 
they might have lived there along with their destroyer. On 
Mount Suswa, a dormant volcano in Kenya, there are long 
lava tunnels, with leopards living in the depths and baboon 
troops sheltering in the entrance by night. The leopards have 
a living larder at their own front door. 

In the Transvaal, the winter nights are cold: so cold that the 
number of baboons in the High Veldt is limited by the number 
of caves or shelters available for sleeping in. At the time of the 
First Northern Glaciation, there may have been a hundred 
nights of frost. And in the cold, let us now imagine robustus: 
migrants who will have trekked to the highlands in summer 
and retired to the valleys in winter, without defences but their 
own brute strength; without fire; without warmth but their 
own huddled bodies; night-blind, yet forced to share their quarters 
with a glitter-eyed cat, who, now and then, will have 
prowled out to grab a straggler. 

The second hypothesis introduces an idea to set the head 
spinning. 
Could it be, Brain asks, that Dinofelis was a specialist predator 
on the primates? 

'A combination of robust jaws,' he writes, 'and a well developed 
component in the dentition would have allowed 
Dinofelis to eat all parts of a primate skeleton except the skull. 
The hypothesis that Dinofelis was a specialist killer of the 
primates is persuasive.' 

Could it be, one is tempted to ask, that Dinofelis was Our 
Beast? A Beast set aside from all the other Avatars of Hell? 
The Arch-Enemy who stalked us, stealthily and cunningly, 
wherever we went? But whom, in the end, we got the better of? 

Coleridge once jotted in a notebook, 'The Prince of Darkness 
is a Gentleman.' What is so beguiling about a specialist predator 
is the idea of an intimacy with the Beast! For if, originally, 
there was one particular Beast, would we not want to fascinate 
him as he fascinated us? Would we not want to charm him, 
as the angels charmed the lions in Daniel's cell? 

The snakes, scorpions and other menacing creatures of the 
savannah - which, apart from their zoological actuality, have 
enjoyed a second career in the Hells of the Mystics - could 
never have threatened our existence, as such; never have postulated 
the end of our world. A specialist killer could have — 
which is why, however tenuous the evidence, we must take 
him seriously. 

'Bob' Brain's achievement, as I see it — whether we allow for 
one big cat, for several cats, or for horrors like the hunting 
hyena - is to have reinstated a figure whose presence has grown 
dimmer and dimmer since the close of the Middle Ages: the 
Prince of Darkness in all his sinister magnificence. 

Without straining the bounds of scientific rigour (as I undoubtedly 
have), he has laid bare the record of a tremendous 
victory - a victory on which we yet may build - when man, 
in becoming man, got the better of the powers of destruction. 

For suddenly, in the upper levels of Swartkrans and Sterkfontein, 
man is there. He is in charge and the predators are 
no longer with him. 

Compared to this victory, the rest of our achievements may 
be seen as so many frills. You could say we are a species on 
holiday. Yet perhaps it had to be a Pyrrhic victory: has not the 
whole of history been a search for false monsters? A nostalgia 
for the Beast we have lost? For the Gentleman who bowed out 
gracefully — and left us with the weapon in our hand? 

ROLF AND I WERE having an evening drink when one of Estrella's 
nurses came running over to say there was a man on the radiotelephone. 
I hoped it was Arkady. After all my outpouring on to 
paper I longed for a session of his cool, appraising talk. 

We both hurried over to the dispensary only to find it was not a 
man on the air, but a very gruff-voiced woman: Eileen Houston, 
of the Aboriginal Arts Bureau in Sydney. 

'Has Winston finished his painting yet?' she growled. 

'He has,' Rolf said. 

'OK. Tell him I'll be over at nine sharp.' 

The line went dead. 

'Bitch,' said Rolf. 

Winston Japurula, the most 'important' artist working at 
Cullen, had, only the week before, completed a major canvas and 
was waiting for Mrs Houston to come and buy it from him. Like 
many artists, he was generous with hand-outs, and had run up big 
debts at the store. 

Mrs Houston, who described herself as 'the doyenne of dealers 
in Aboriginal Art', had the habit of driving round the settlements 
to check up on her artists. She brought them paint and brushes 
and canvas, and would pay for finished work by cheque. She was 
a very determined woman. She always camped in the bush, alone 
— and was never not in a hurry. 
Next morning, Winston was waiting for her, cross-legged, 
naked to the waist, on a patch of level ground beside the petrol 
drums. He was an ageing voluptuary, with rolls of fat spilling 
over his paint-spattered shorts and an immense down-curving 
mouth. His sons and grandsons bore the stamp of his magnificent 
ugliness. He was doodling a monster on a scrap of card. He had 
acquired, by osmosis, the temperament and mannerisms of 
Lower West Broadway. 

His 'policeman' or ritual manager, a younger man in brown 
slacks called Bobby, was on hand to make sure Winston didn't 
leak any sacred knowledge. 

At nine sharp, the boys sighted Mrs Houston's red Land 
Cruiser coming up the airstrip. She got out, walked towards the 
group and set her haunches on a camping-stool. 

'Morning, Winston,' she nodded. 

'Morning,' he said, without moving. 

She was a big woman in a beige 'battle-dress'. Her scarlet 
sunhat, like a topee, was rammed down over a head of greying 
curls. Her pale, heat-ravaged cheeks tapered off into a very 
pointed chin. 

'What are we waiting for ?' she asked. 'I thought I'd come to see 
a painting.' 
Winston fiddled with his hairstring and, with a wave, deputed 
his grandsons to fetch it from the store. 

Six of them came back carrying a large stretched canvas, say, 
seven foot by five, protected from the dust with a clear plastic 
sheet. They set it gingerly on the ground, and unwrapped it. 

Mrs Houston blinked. I watched her holding back a smile of 
pleasure. She had commissioned Winston to paint a 'white' 
picture. But this, I think, was beyond her expectations. 

So many Aboriginal artists used strident colour schemes. Here, 
simply, were six white to creamy-white circles, painted in 
meticulous 'pointillist' dots, on a background which varied 
from white to blueish white to the palest ochre. In the space 
between the circles there were a few snakelike squiggles in an 
equally pale lilac grey. 

Mrs Houston worked her lips. You could almost hear her 
mental calculations: a white gallery .. . a white abstraction . . . 
White on White . . . Malevich . . . New York . . . 

She dabbed the sweat from her brow and pulled herself 
together. 

'Winston!' she pointed a finger at the canvas. 

'Yairs.' 

'Winston, you didn't use the titanium white like I said! What's 
the use my paying for expensive pigments if you don't even use 
them? You've been using zinc white. Haven'tyou? Answer me!' 
Winston's reaction was to fold his arms across his face 
and peer through a chink, like a child playing peek-a-boo. 

'Did you, or did you not, use the titanium white?' 
'NO!' Winston shouted, without lowering his arms. 
'I thought not,' she said, and raised her chin in satisfaction. 
She then looked again at the canvas and spotted a tiny tear, 
less than an inch long, on the edge of one of the circles. 

'And look!' she cried. 'You've torn it. Winston, you've torn 
the canvas. Do you know what that means? This painting will 
have to be re-lined. I shall have to send this painting to the 
restorers in Melbourne. And it'll cost at least three hundred 
dollars. It's a shame.' 

Winston, who had dropped his defences, wrapped his arms 
around his face again and presented a blank front to the dealer. 
'It's a shame,' she repeated. 
The onlookers stared at the canvas as though they were 
staring at a corpse. 
Mrs Houston's jaw began to quiver. She had gone too far, 
and would have to assume a more conciliatory tone. 

'But it's a nice painting, Winston,' she said. 'It'll do nicely for 
our travelling exhibition. I told you we were making a 
collection, didn't I? Of all the best Pintupi artists? Didn't I? Do 
you hear me?' 

Her voice sounded anxious. Winston said nothing. 
'Do you hear me?' 
'Yairs,' he drawled, and let down his arms. 
'Well, that's all right, then, isn't it?' She tried to laugh. 
'Yairs.' 
She took a pad and pencil from her shoulder bag. 
'So what's the story, Winston?' 
'What story?' 
'The story of the painting.' 
'I painted it.' 
'I know you painted it. I mean, what's the Dreaming story? I 


can't sell a painting without a story. You know that!' 
'Do I?' 
'You do.' 
'Old Man,'he said. 
'Thank you,' she started scribbling on the pad. 'So the 

painting's an Old Man Dreaming?' 
'Yairs.' 
'And?' 

'And what?' 

'The rest of the story.' 

'What story?' 

'The story of the Old Man,' she said, furiously. 'What is the 
Old Man doing?' 
'Walking,' said Winston, who doodled a double dotted line in 
the sand. 

'Of course, he's walking,' she said. 'Where's he walking to?' 

Winston bugged his eyes at the canvas, and looked up at his 
'policeman'. 
Bobby winked. 
'I asked you,' said Mrs Houston, mouthing her syllables. 
' Where is the Old Man walking?' 

Winston drew in his lips and said nothing. 

'Well, what's that?' She pointed to one of the white circles. 

'Salt-pan,' he said. 

'And that one?' 

'Salt-pan.' 

'That one?' 

'Salt-pan. All of 'em salt-pans.' 

'So the Old Man's walking over salt-pans?' 

'Yairs.' 

'Not much of a story there!' Mrs Houston shrugged. 'What 
about those squiggles in the middle?' 
'Pitjuri,' he said. 
Pitjuri is a mild narcotic which Aboriginals chew to suppress 
hunger. Winston rolled his head and eyes from side to side, like 
a man 'on' pitjuri. The audience laughed. Mrs Houston did not. 

'I see,' she said. Then, thinking aloud to herself, she began to 
jot down the outline of the story, 'The ancient white-bearded 
Ancestor, dying of thirst, is trudging home across a glittering 
salt-pan and finds, on the farther shore, a plant of pitjuri . . .' 

She put her pencil between her lips and looked at me for 
confirmation. 

I smiled sweetly. 

'Yes, that's nice,' she said. 'That'll make a nice beginning.' 

Winston had lifted his eyes from the canvas and fastened 
them on her. 
'I know,' she said. 'I know\ Now we've got to fix the price, 
haven't we? How much did I give you last time?' 

'Five hundred dollars,' he said, sourly. 

'And how much did I advance you this time?' 

'Two hundred.' 

'That's right, Winston. You've got it right. Well, now there's 
the damage to be repaired. So suppose we deduct a hundred for, 
the damage, and I'll pay you another three hundred? That's a 
hundred more than before. Then we'll be quits.' 

Winston didn't move. 

'And I'll need to take a photo of you,' she chattered on. 'I 
think you'd better get some more clothes on. We need a nice 
new photo for the catalogue.' 

'No!'Winston bellowed. 

'What do you mean, no?' Mrs Houston looked very shocked. 
'You don't want your photo taken?' 

'NO!' he bellowed louder. 'I want more money!' 

'More money? I. . . I. . . don't understand.' 

'I said MORE . . . MONEY!' 

She assumed an aggrieved expression, as though dealing with 
an ungrateful child, and then said, icily, 'How much?' 
Again, Winston shielded his face with his arms. 
'How much do you want?' she persisted. 'I'm not here to 
waste my time. I've named my price. You name yours.' 

He didn't move. 

'This is ridiculous,' she said. 

He said nothing. 

'I'm not making another offer,' she said. 'You've got to name 
your price.' 

Nothing. 

'Go on. Say it. How much?' 

Winston's lower arm shot downwards, making a triangular 
slit through which he shouted, 'six THOUSAND DOLLARS!' 
Mrs Houston nearly fell off her stool. 'Six thousand dollars! 
You have to be joking!' 
'Well, why are you asking seven fuckin' thousand dollars for 
one of my paintings in your fuckin' exhibition in Adelaide?' 

GIVEN THE LINE-UP of real monsters confronting the First Man, 
it is out of the question to suppose that tribal fighting and 
warfare were a part of the original scheme of things — only 
the classical forms of co-operation. 

Ib'n Khaldun writes that whereas God gave animals their natural 
limbs for defence, he gave man the ability to think. The 
power of thought allowed him to manufacture weapons — lances 
instead of horns, swords instead of claws, shields in place of 
thick skins - and to organise communities for producing them. 

Since any one individual was powerless against the wild 
animal, especially the predatory animal, man could protect 
himself only through communal defence. But, in conditions of 
civilisation, the war of all against all broke out with equipment 
designed to keep away the predators. 

What was the weapon to deter a beast like Dinofelis} 
Fire, certainly. I would guess that one day, somewhere, an 
excavator will discover that Homo habilis did use fire. 

As for 'conventional' weapons, a hand-axe? Useless! A club? 
Worse than useless! Only a spear or lance, like the one St 
George rams into the jaws of the dragon, would have the 
required effect: a lance aimed and thrust, with split-second 
timing, by a young man at the height of his physical powers. 

Democritus (fr. 154) said it was absurd for men to vaunt their 
superiority over the animals when, in matters of great importance, 
it was they who were our teachers: the spider for weaving 
and mending; the swallow for architecture; the swan and 
the nightingale for singing. 

To which one could go on adding indefinitely: the bat for 
radar; the dolphin for sonar and, as Ib'n Khaldun said, horns 
for the lance. 

Sasriem, Namib Desert 

Herds of ostrich, zebra and gemsbok (the African oryx) moving 
in the early light against a backdrop of orange dunes. The 
valley floor was a sea of grey pebbles. 

The Park Warden said of the straight lances of the oryx that 
they were wonderfully effective against a leopard but were, in 
practice, a case of over-specialisation: two males, when fighting, 
would sometimes run each other through. 

When we got out of the car there was an oryx close by, 
standing behind a bush. The warden warned us to be careful: 
they have been known to impale a man. 

In one Biblical tradition, the 'mark' God set upon Cain was 
'horns': to defend himself from the beasts of the wilderness, 
who thirsted for vengeance for the death of their master, Abel. 

The peculiar image, in Pope Gregory the Great's Moralia, of 
Christ's body as a hook for the Beast. 

The third invention, invisible to archaeologists, will have been 
the sling — fibre or leather — in which a mother carried her 
nursing child, leaving her hands free for gathering roots or 
berries. 

The sling was thus the first vehicle. 

As Lorna Marshall writes of the !Kung Bushmen, 'They carry 
their children and their belongings in leather capes. The naked 
babies ride next to the mother supported by a sling of soft 
duiker leather on the left side.' 

Hunting peoples have no milk from domesticated animals; and, 
as Mrs Marshall says, milk is what makes a baby's legs strong. 
The mother cannot afford to wean the child until the age of 
three or four or more. And either she or the father must carry 
it until it can keep up a day's march on its own: journeys of 
sixty or a hundred miles, with two or three 'sleeps' on the way. 
The married couple are a unit for carriage and defence. 

The late C. W. Peck recorded a myth concerning the origin of 
weapons from western New South Wales. I suggest that its 
validity is universal: 

Long ago, when men had no weapons and were defenceless 
against the wild beasts, there was a big mob of people camped 
at the confluence of the Lachlan and Murrumbidgee Rivers. 
The day was hot. Mirages distorted the landscape, and everyone 
was resting in the shade. Suddenly, a horde of Giant 
Kangaroos attacked, crushing their victims with their powerful 
arms. The people fled in panic, and few survived. 

Among the" survivors, however, was the headman, who 
called a meeting to discuss means of defence. It was at this 
meeting that men invented spears, shields, clubs and boomerangs. 
And since many of the young women had dropped 
their babies in the rush, it was they who invented the ingenious 
bark cradle. 

The tale goes on to describe how the cleverest of the men, 
camouflaging himself with fat and dust, stole up on the 
Kangaroos and drove them off with fire. 

There were Giant Kangaroos in prehistoric Australia — and 
dangerous they must have been when cornered — but they were 
not carnivores, not attackers. 

As for the young heroes, they could only become 'fit' as a result 
of the most rigorous training among themselves: in wrestling, 
^rappling and the art of wielding weapons. Adolescence is the 
sparring' phase. After that, all enmities are — or should be channelled 
outward on to the Adversary. 
The 'war boys' are the ones who never grow up. 

Niger 

The manager of the Campement was a Frenchwoman called 
Madame Marie, whose hair was the colour of goldfish and 
who did not like other white people. Divorced by her husband 
for going to bed with black men, she had lost a villa, a Mercedes, 
a swimming pool en forme de rognon, but she had carried 
away her jewels. 

On the third night of my visit, she organised a soiree musicale 
with equal billing for Anou et ses Sorciers Noirs and herself, 
Marie et son Go. When the show was over, she took one of 
the sorcerers to bed with her, and at two thirty had a heart 
attack. The sorcerer rushed from the bedroom, gibbering, T 
did not touch Madame.' 

Next day she defied the attempts of her doctor to send her 
to hospital and lay on her bed, stripped of make-up, gazing 
out across the thornscrub and sighing, 'La lumiere . . . Oh! la 
belle lumiere . . .' 

Around eleven two Bororo boys arrived. They were skittishly 
dressed in short women's skirts and straw bonnets. 

The Bororos are nomads who wander up and down the 
Sahel with total disdain for material possessions, concentrating 
all their energy and emotion into the breeding of their 
lovely lyre-horned cattle, and on cultivating beauty in themselves. 

The boys - one with 'weight-lifter' biceps, the other slender 
and beautiful — had come to ask Marie if she had any spare 
cosmetics. 

'Mais surement. . .' she called from the bedroom, and we 
all went in. 

Reaching for her vanity case, she showered the contents over 
the bedspread, occasionally saying, 'Non, pas qaV All the same, 
the boys picked up every shade of lipstick, nail varnish, eye 
shadow and eyebrow pencil. They wrapped their loot in a 
headscarf. She gave them a few back numbers of Elle magazine. 
Then, dragging their sandals across the terrace, they ran off 
laughing. 

'It is for their ceremony,' Marie told me. 'Tonight they will 
both become men. You must see it! Un vrai spectacle.' 

'I must!' I said. 

'An hour before sunset,' she said. 'Outside the Emir's 
palace.' 

From the roof of the Emir's palace I had a grandstand view 
of the courtyard, where three musicians were playing: a piper, 
a drummer and a man who twanged at a three-stringed instrument 
with a calabash for a sound-box. 

The man sitting next to me, an ancien combattant, spoke 
good French. 

A 'master of ceremonies' appeared and ordered two young 
assistants to scatter a circle of white powder, like a circus-ring, 
in the dust. When this was done, the young men stood guard 
over the space and flew at trespassers with swatches of palm 
fibre. 

Among the audience were a lot of middle-aged Bororo ladies 
and their daughters. The daughters wore a kind of white wimple. 
The mothers were wrapped in indigo and had brass hoops 
jangling in their ears. They cast their eyes over prospective 
sons-in-law with the expertise of ladies at a bloodstock sale. 

In the inner court were the young men, who for the past 
four years had been obliged to parade about in female dress. 
We heard a volley of whooping cries: then, to the rattle of 
drums, in walked the two boys plastered with Marie's make-up. 

The 'tough' one had a pink cupid's bow around his lips; his 
fingernails were scarlet and his eyelids green. His strapless 
bouffant dress had lavender panels over a rose-coloured 
underskirt. The effect was ruined by a pair of fluorescent green 
socks and gym-shoes. 

His friend, the 'beauty', wore a tight mauve turban, a sheath 
of green and white stripes, and had a more modern sense of 
fashion. He had been very careful with the lipstick, and on 
either cheek he had painted two neat rectangles in bands of 
pink and white. He had on a pair of reflecting sunglasses, and 
was admiring himself in a hand-mirror. 

The crowd cheered. 

Another young Bororo came out carrying a choice of three 
'Herculean' clubs, each freshly cut from the bole of an acacia. 
He offered the beauty his choice of weapon. 

Removing his sunglasses, the beauty pointed languidly to 
the biggest, popped something into his mouth, and waved to 
his friends on the rooftop. They howled their approval and 
raised their plastic boaters at spearpoint. 

The master of ceremonies picked up the beauty's choice and, 
with the solemnity of a waiter serving a Chateau Lafite, presented 
it to the tough one. 

The beauty then took up his position at the centre of the 
circle and, holding his sunglasses above his head, started warbling 
a chant in falsetto. The friend, meanwhile, swinging the 
club with both hands, pirouetted around the rim of the circle. 

The drummer stepped up the tempo. The beauty sang as 
though his lungs would burst; and the tough one, whirling 
faster and faster, closed in. At last, with a bone-crushing thud, 
he whammed the club on to his friend's ribcage and the friend 
let out a triumphant 'Yaou ...0...0...0...0...!' — but 
did not flinch. 

'What was he singing?' I asked the ancien combattant. 

'I can kill a lion,' he said,'. . . I have got the biggest cock . . . 
I can satisfy a thousand women . . .' 

'Of course,' I said. 

Having repeated the same performance twice more, it was 
the beauty's turn to club the tough one. When that was over, 
the two of them — best friends and blood-brothers for life — 
went sauntering around the spectators, who reached their hands 
forward and stuck banknotes on to their face-paint. 

Hand in hand, the boys went back to the palace. Two more 
pairs went through the same business: but they were both less 
'chic'. Then they, too, retired. 

The assistants erased the white circle and everyone thronged 
into the courtyard, waiting for something to happen. 

It was almost dark when, from the inner court, there came 
more blood-curdling cries. Another rattle of drums, and all six 
boys marched in, hard and glistening, in black leather kilts, 
their hats stuck with ostrich feathers, swaying their shoulders, 
swinging their swords — as they moved in to mix with the girls. 

'They are men,' said the ancien combattant, 

I looked down, in the half-light, at the mass of blue and 
black figures, like the waves at night with a whitecap or two, 
and silver jewellery glinting like flecks of phosphorescence. 

ROLF AND WENDY, TO give each other space, had set up 
separate establishments. Rolf and the books had the caravan. 
Wendy, on nights when she wanted to be alone, would sleep in a 
concrete lock-up. It had been the school store in the days when 
all lessons were in the open air. 

She asked me to come and watch her at work on the 
dictionary. It was drizzling. A fine light rain was moving in from 
the west, and everyone had taken to their humpies. 

I found Wendy with Old Alex, both squatting over a tray of 
botanical specimens: seed-pods, dried flowers, leaves and roots. 
He was wearing the plum velvet coat. When Wendy handed him 
a specimen, he would turn it over, hold it to the light, whisper to 
himself and then call out its name in Pintupi. She made him 
repeat the name a number of times: to be assured of its phonetic 
pronunciation. She would then tag the specimen with a label. 

There was only one plant Alex didn't know: the dried-up 
head of a thistle. 'Come with white man,' he frowned. 
'And he's right too,' Wendy turned to me. 'It's a European 
introduction.' 
She thanked him and he walked away, his spears slung over 
his shoulder. 
'He's the real thing,' she said, smiling after him. 'But you can't 
ask too much in a day - his attention wanders.' 

Wendy's room was as austere as Rolf's was chaotic. She kept 
a few clothes in a suitcase. There was a grey metal bedstead, a 
wash-stand, and a telescope on a tripod. 'It's an old family 
thing,' she said. 'It belonged to my grandfather.' 

Some nights, she would drag the bed outside and go to sleep 
gazing at the stars. 
She picked up Alex's tray and took me to a smaller tin shed, 
where, laid out on trestles, were many more specimens: not only 
of plants, but of eggs, insects, reptiles, birds, snakes and lumps 
of rock. 
'I'm supposed to be an ethnobotanist,' she laughed. 'But it's 
all got a bit out of hand.' 

Alex was her best informant. You couldn't exhaust his 
knowledge of plants. He would reel off the names of species, 
when and where they would be coming into flower. He used 
them as a kind of calendar. 

'Working out here alone,' she said, 'your head fills up with 
such mad ideas, and there's no one to test them out on.' She 
threw back her head and laughed. 

'Lucky I've got Rolf,' she said. 'No idea's too mad for him.' 

'Such as?' 

She had never had a training in linguistics. Yet her work on 
the dictionary had given her an interest in the myth of Babel. 
Why, when Aboriginal life had been so uniform, had there been 
200 languages in Australia? Could you really explain this in 
terms of tribalism or isolation? Surely not! She was beginning to 
wonder whether language itself might not relate to the distribution 
of the human species over the land. 

'Sometimes,' she said, 'I'll ask Old Alex to name a plant and 
he'll answer "No name", meaning, "The plant doesn't grow in 
my country."' 

She'd then look for an informant who bad, as a child, lived 
where the plant grew — and find it did have a name after all. 

The 'dry heart' of Australia, she said, was a jigsaw of 
microclimates, of different minerals in the soil and different 
plants and animals. A man raised in one part of the desert would 
know its flora and fauna backwards. He knew which plant 
attracted game. He knew his water. He knew where there were 
tubers underground. In other words, by naming all the 'things' 
in his territory, he could always count on survival. 

'But if you took him blindfold to another country,' she said, 
'he might end up lost and starving.' 

'Because he'd lost his bearings?' 

'Yes.' 

'You're saying that man "makes" his territory by naming the 
"things" in it?' 
'Yes, I am!' Her face lit up. 
'So the basis for a universal language can never have existed?' 

'Yes. Yes.' 

Wendy said that, even today, when an Aboriginal mother 
notices the first stirrings of speech in her child, she lets it handle 
the 'things' of that particular country: leaves, fruit, insects and 
so forth. 

The child, at its mother's breast, will toy with the 'thing', talk 
to it, test its teeth on it, learn its name, repeat its name - and 
finally chuck it aside. 

'We give our children guns and computer games,' Wendy 
said. 'They gave their children the land.' 

THE MOST SUBLIME labour of poetry is to give sense and 
passion to insensate things; and it is characteristic of children 
to take inanimate things in their hands and talk to them in 
play as if they were living persons . . . This philologicalphilosophical 
axiom proves to us that in the world's childhood 
men were by nature sublime poets . . . 

Giambattista Vico, The New Science, xxxvn 

Men vent great passions by breaking into song, as we observe 
in the most grief-stricken and the most joyful. 
Vico, The New Science, LIX 

The Ancient Egyptians believed the seat of the soul was in the 
tongue: the tongue was a rudder or steering-oar with which a 
man steered his course through the world. 

'Primitive' languages consist of very long words, full of difficult 
sounds and sung rather than spoken . . . The early 
words must have been to present ones what the plesiosaurus 
and gigantosaurus are to present-day reptiles. 

O. Jespersen, Language 
Poetry is the mother tongue of the human race as the garden 
is older than the field, painting than writing, singing than 
declaiming, parables than inferences, bartering than commerce 
... 

J. G. Hamann, Aesthetica in Nuce 
All passionate language does of itself become musical — with 
a finer music than the mere accent; the speech of a man even 
in zealous anger becomes a chant, a song. 

Thomas Carlyle, quoted in Jespersen, Language 

Words well voluntarily from the breast without need or 
intent, and there has probably not been in any desert waste 
a migratory horde that did not possess its own songs. As an 
animal species, the human being is a singing creature, but 
he combines ideals with the musical sounds involved. 
Wilhelm von Humboldt, Linguistic Variability and 
Intellectual Development 

According to Strehlow, the Aranda word tnakama means 'to 
call by name' and also 'to trust' and 'to believe'. 

Poetry proper is never merely a higher mode [melos) of everyday 
language. It is rather the reverse: everyday language is 
a forgotten and therefore used-up poem, from which there 
hardly resounds a call any longer. 

Martin Heidegger, 'Language' 

Richard Lee calculated that a Bushman child will be carried a 
distance of 4 ,900 miles before he begins to walk on his own. 
Since, during this rhythmic phase, he will be forever naming 
the contents of his territory, it is impossible he will not become 
a poet. 

Proust, more perspicaciously than any other writer, reminds 
us that the 'walks' of childhood form the raw material of our 
intelligence: 

The flowers that people show me nowadays for the first time 
never seem to me to be true flowers. The Meseglise Way 
with its lilacs, its hawthorns, its cornflowers, its poppies, the 
Guermantes Way with its river full of tadpoles, its waterlilies, 
and its buttercups have constituted for me for all time the 
picture of the land in which I would fain pass my life . . . 
the cornflowers, the hawthorns, the apple-trees, which I happen, 
when I go out walking, to encounter in the fields, because 
at the same depth, on the level of my past life, at once 
established contact with my heart. 

As a general rule of biology, migratory species are less 'aggressive' 
than sedentary ones. 

There is one obvious reason why this should be so. The 
migration itself, like the pilgrimage, is the hard journey: a 
'leveller' on which the 'fit' survive and stragglers fall by the 
wayside. 

The journey thus pre-empts the need for hierarchies and 
shows of dominance. The 'dictators' of the animal kingdom 
are those who live in an ambience of plenty. The anarchists, 
as always, are the 'gentlemen of the road'. 

What can we do? We were born with the Great Unrest. Our 
father taught us that life is one long journey on which only 
the unfit are left behind. 

Caribou Eskimo to Dr Knud Rassmussen 

The above reminds me of the two undeniable fossils of Homo 
habilis which had been dragged into the Swartkrans Cave and 
eaten: one, the boy with a brain tumour; the other, an old and 
arthritic woman. 

Among the papers Elizabeth Vrba recommended was one entitled 
'Competition or Peaceful Coexistence?' by John Wiens. 

Wiens, an ornithologist who works in New Mexico, has 
been studying the behaviour of the migratory songbirds - the 
dirkcissels, sage sparrows, sage thrashers — that return each 
summer to nest in the arid brush of the Western Plains. 

Here, where years of famine may be followed by a sudden 
onrush of plenty, the birds show no signs of increasing their 
numbers to match the abundance of food: nor of stepping up 
competition with their neighbours. Rather, he concluded, the 
migrants must have some internal mechanism which favours 
co-operation and co-existence. 

He goes on to claim that the great Darwinian 'struggle for 
life' may, paradoxically, be more relevant to stable climates 
than volatile ones. In regions of assured abundance, animals 
will stake out and defend their lot with shows of aggressive 
display. In the badlands, where nature is rarely kind - yet there' 
is usually room to move - they make their meagre resources 
serve them and so find their way without fighting. 

In Aranda Traditions Strehlow contrasts two Central Australian 
peoples: one sedentary, one mobile. 

The Aranda, living in a country of safe waterholes and plentiful 
game, were arch-conservatives whose ceremonies were 
unchangeable, initiations brutal, and whose penalty for sacrilege 
was death. They looked on themselves as a 'pure' race, 
and rarely thought of leaving their land. 

The Western Desert People, on the other hand, were as openminded 
as the Aranda were closed. They borrowed songs and 
dances freely, loving their land no less and yet forever on the 
move. 'The most striking thing about these people; Strehlow 
writes, 'was their ready laughter. They were a cheerful laughing 
people, who bore themselves as though they had never known 
a care in the world. Aranda men, civilised on sheep stations, 
used to say, 'They are always laughing. They can't help it." ' 

A late summer evening in Manhattan, the crowds out of town, 
cycling down lower Park Avenue with the light slanting in 
from the cross-streets and a stream of monarch butterflies, 
alternately brown in the shadow and golden in the sun, coming 
round the Pan Am Building, descending from the statue of 
Mercury on Grand Central Station and continuing downtown 
towards the Caribbean. 

In the course of my reading on animal migration, I learned 
about the journeys of the cod, the eel, the herring, the sardine 
and the suicidal exodus of lemmings. 

I weighed up the pros and cons for the existence of a 'sixth 
sense' - a magnetic sense of direction - within the human 
central nervous system. I saw the march of wildebeeste across 
the Serengeti. I read of birds that 'learn' their journeys from 
their parents; and of the fledgling cuckoo that never knew its 
parents and so must have had the journey in its genes. 

All animal migrations have been conditioned by shifting zones 
of climate, and, in the case of the green turtle, by the shift of 
the continents themselves. 

There were theories of how birds fix their position by the 
height of the sun, the phases of the moon, and the rising and 
setting of stars; and of how they make navigational adjustments 
if blown off course by a storm. Certain ducks and geese 
can 'record' the choruses of frogs beneath them, and 'know' 
that they are flying over marsh. Other night-fliers bounce their 
calls on to the ground below, and, catching the echo, fix their 
altitude and the nature of the terrain. 

The howls of migrating fish can pass through the sides of a 
ship, and wake up sailors from their bunks. A salmon knows 
the taste of its ancestral river. Dolphins flash echo-locating 
clicks on to submarine reefs, in order to steer a safe passage 
through .. . It has even occurred to me that, when a dolphin 
'triangulates' to determine its position, its behaviour is analogous 
to our own, as we name and compare the 'things' encountered 
in our daily lives, and so establish our place in the 
world. 

Every book I consulted had, as a matter of course, an account 
of the most spectacular of bird migrations: the flight of the 
Arctic tern, a bird which nests in the tundra; winters in Antarctic 
waters, and then flies back to the north. 

I slammed the book shut. The leather armchairs in the London 
Library made me feel drowsy. The man sitting next to me was 
snoring with a literary journal spread over his stomach. To 
hell with migration! I said to myself. I put the stack of books 
on the table. I was hungry. 

Outside, it was a cold, sunny December day. I was hoping 
to cadge lunch from a friend. On St James's Street, I was 
walking abreast of White's Club when a cab drew up and a 
man in a velvet-collared coat got out. He flourished a pair of 
pound notes at the cabbie and advanced towards the steps. He 
had thick grey hair and a mesh of burst blood-vessels, as though 
a transparent red stocking had been pulled over his cheeks. He 
was — I knew him from photographs - a Duke. 

At the same moment, a second man, in an ex-army greatcoat, 
sockless, and in boots tied up with twine, pressed forward with 
an ingratiating smile. 

'Er . . . Forgive me for troubling you, Sir,' he said, in a thick 
Irish accent. 'I was wondering if by any chance , . .' 

The Duke pressed on through the door. 

I looked at the tramp, who gave me a knowing wink. Some 
wisps of reddish hair floated above a blotchy scalp. He had 
watery willing-you-to-believe eyes, focused a short way in front 
of his nose. He must have been in his late sixties. From my 
appearance, he did not think it worthwhile to urge a claim on 
my pocket. 

'I've got an idea,' I said to him. 

'Yes, guv'nor.' 

'You're a travelling man, right?' 

'All over the world, guv'nor.' 

'Well, if you'd like to tell me about your travels, I'd like to 
buy you lunch.' 
'And I'd be pleased to accept.' 
We went round the corner into Jermyn Street to a crowded, 
inexpensive Italian restaurant. There was one small table left. 

I didn't suggest he take off his coat for fear of what lay 
underneath. The smell was incredible. Two smart secretaries 
edged away from us, tucking in their skirts as though expecting 
an invasion of fleas. 

'What'll you have?' I asked. 

'Er . . . and what'll you be having?' 

'Go on,' I said. 'Order anything you like.' 

He scanned the menu, holding it upside down with the assurance 
of a regular customer who feels duty-bound to check 
the plat du jour. 

'Steak and chips!' he said. 

The waitress stopped chewing the butt of her pencil and 
aimed a long-suffering glance at the secretaries. 
'Rump or sirloin?' she asked. 
'As you like,' he said. 
'Two sirloins,' I said. 'One medium. One medium-rare.' 
He slaked his thirst with a beer, but his mind was mesmerised 

by the thought of food and dribbles of saliva appeared at the 
corner of his mouth. 

I knew that tramps are systematic in their methods of scavenging, 
and will return again and again to a favourite set of 
dustbins. What, I asked him, was his method with the London 
clubs? 

He thought for a moment and said the best bet was always 
the Athenaeum. There were still religious gentlemen among its 
members. 

'Yes,' he ruminated. 'You can usually bum a bob off a 
Bishop.' 
The next best, in the old days, used to be the Travellers'. 
Those gentlemen, like himself, had seen the world. 
'A meeting of minds, you might say,' he said. 'But nowadays 
. . . no . . . no.' 
The Travellers' was not what it was. Taken over by another 
class of persons. 
'Advertising people,' he said grimly. 'Very tight, I can assure 
you.' 
He added that Brooks's, Boodle's and White's all fell into 
the same category. High risk! Generosity .. . or nothing! 

His steak, when it came, completely inhibited his powers of 
conversation. He attacked it with dull ferocity, raised the plate 
to his face, licked off the juices, and then, remembering where 
he was, set it back on the table. 

'Have another?' I said. 

'I wouldn't say no, guv'nor,' he said. 'Very civil of you!' 

I ordered a second steak, and he launched into his life story. 
It was worth it. The tale, as it expanded, was exactly what I 
wanted to hear: the croft in County Galway, the mother's 
death, Liverpool, the Atlantic, the meat-yards in Chicago, Australia, 
the Depression, the South Sea Islands . . . 

'Oooh! That's the place for you, my boy! Ta-hiti! Va-hines!' 

He laid his tongue along his lower lip. 

'Vahines!' he repeated. 'That's the word for women . . . Oooh! 
Love-ely! Did it standing up under a waterfall!' 

The secretaries called for the bill and left. I looked up and 
saw the thick jowls of the head waiter, who eyed us with a 
hostile stare. I was afraid we were going to get kicked out. 

'Now,' I said, 'I'd like to know something else.' 

'Yes, guv'nor,' he said. 'All ears.' 

'Would you ever go back to Ireland?' 

'No,' he closed his eyes. 'No, I wouldn't care to. Too many 
bad memories.' 

'Well, do you think of anywhere as "home"?' 

'I most certainly do,' he jerked his head back and grinned. 
'The Promenade des Anglais in Nice. Ever heard o' that?' 
'I have,' I said. 
One summer night on the Promenade, he had engaged a 

well-spoken French gentleman in conversation. For an hour 
they had discussed the world situation, in English. The gentleman 
had then unfolded from his wallet a 10,000 franc note '
The old francs, mind you!' - and, after handing him his card, 
had wished him a pleasant stay. 

'Bloody Hell!' he shouted. 'He was the Chief of Police!' 
He had tried, whenever possible, to revisit the scene of this, 
the most moving moment of his career. 
'Yes,' he chuckled. 'I bummed the Chief of Police .. . in 
Nice!' 

The restaurant was now less crowded. I ordered him a double 
helping of apple pie. He declined a cup of coffee which, 
he said, made his tummy feel poorly. He belched. I paid. 

'Thank you, Sir,' he said, with the air of an interviewee who 
has a string of afternoon engagements. 'I hope I have been of 
assistance.' 

'You certainly have,' I thanked him. 

He got to his feet, but sat down again and stared at me 
intently. Having described the externals of his life, he was not 
going to go without some comment on its inner motivation. 

He then said, slowly and with great seriousness: 

'It's like the tides was pulling you along the highway. I'm 
like the Arctic tern, guv'nor. That's a bird. A beautiful white 
bird what flies from the North Pole to the South Pole and back 
again.' 

IT RAINED AGAIN in the night and in the morning, when I looked 
out of the window, the sun was up and clouds of purple vapour 
appeared to be peeling off the flank of Mount Liebler. 

At ten, Rolf and I went over to look for Limpy. A message had 
come from Arkady, three weeks overdue, to expect him on the 
mail-plane. It was important. . . repeat, 'very important' that 
Limpy and Titus were available. 

The medicinal smell from eucalyptus fires drifted across the 
valley. The dog howled at our approach. People were drying 
their blankets. 

'Limpy?' Rolf called, and a faint voice echoed from a 
ramshackle caravan some way uphill. 

'So that's where they are!' he said. 

The caravan had been optimistically painted with the words 
'Recreation Centre'. It contained a wobbly ping-pong table, 
minus the net, which was covered with a film of red dust. 

The three grand old men were sitting on the floor: Limpy, 
Alex and Joshua — in hats. Limpy had on a stetson, Joshua, a 
Yankee baseball cap, and Alex wore a magnificent frayed-out 
bushwhacker. 

'Is Titus out at the bore?' Rolf asked. 

'Sure he's there!' said Limpy. 

'He's not going anywhere?' 

'Nah!' he shook his head. 'Stay right there.' 

'How d'you know?' Rolf asked. 

T know,' said Limpy, and brought the conversation to an end. 

Rolf told me earlier that Alex owned one of the pearl oystershell 
pendants from the Timor Sea, which had been traded 
across Australia from time immemorial. They were used in 
rain-making ceremonies: Alex's had plainly done its work for 
this year. He then surprised us by plunging his hand between the 
buttons of the velvet coat and pulled out the pendant on the end 
of a string. 
It was engraved with a zigzag meander pattern, rubbed with 
red ochre: it must have been dangling between his legs. 
Superficially, these pendants resemble a tjuringa; but, as far 

as strangers are concerned, they are not necessarily secret. 
'So where does he come from?' I asked, pointing at the shell. 
'Broome,' said Alex, definitely. 
He drew his forefinger across the dusty ping-pong table and 

rattled off all the 'stops' across the Gibson Desert, between 
Cullen and Broome. 
'OK,' I said. 'You get the pearl shells from Broome? What do 

you send back?' 
He hesitated, and then drew in the dust an elongated oval. 
'Board,' he said. 
'Tjuringa?'I asked. 
He nodded. 
'Sacred business? Songs and all?' 
He nodded again. 
'That', I said to Rolf as we walked away, 'is very interesting.' 

THE SONG STILL remains which names the land over which it 
sings. 

Martin Heidegger, What Are Poets For? 

BEFORE COMING TO Australia I'd often talk about the Songlines, 
and people would inevitably be reminded of something else. 

'Like the "ley-lines"?' they'd say: referring to ancient stone 
circles, menhirs and graveyards, which are laid out in lines 
across Britain. They are of great antiquity but are visible only 
to those with eyes to see. 

Sinologists were reminded of the 'dragon-lines' of feng-shui, 
or traditional Chinese geomancy: and when I spoke to a Finnish 
journalist, he said the Lapps had 'singing stones', which 
were also arranged in lines. 

To some, the Songlines were like the Art of Memory in 
reverse. In Frances Yates's wonderful book, one learned how 
classical orators, from Cicero and earlier, would construct 
memory palaces; fastening sections of their speech on to imaginary 
architectural features and then, after working their way 
round every architrave and pillar, could memorise colossal 
lengths of speech. The features were known as loci or 'places'. 
But in Australia the loci were not a mental construction, but 
had existed for ever, as events of the Dreamtime. 

Other friends were reminded of the Nazca 'lines', which are 
etched into the meringue-like surface of the central Peruvian 
Desert and are, indeed, some kind of totemic map. 

We once spent a hilarious week with their self-appointed 
guardian, Maria Reich. One morning, I went with her to see 
the most spectacular of all the lines, which was only visible at 
sunrise. I carried her photographic equipment up a steep hill 
of dust and stones while Maria, in her seventies, strode ahead. 
I was horrified to watch her roll straight past me to the bottom. 

I expected broken bones, but she laughed, 'My father used 
to say that once you start to roll, you must keep on rolling.' 

No. These were not the comparisons I was looking for. Not 
at this stage. I was beyond that. 

Trade means friendship and co-operation; and for the Aboriginal 
the principal object of trade was song. Song, therefore, 
brought peace. Yet I felt the Songlines were not necessarily an 
Australian phenomenon, but universal: that they were the means 
by which man marked out his territory, and so organised his 
social life. All other successive systems were variants — or perversions 
- of this original model. 

The main Songlines in Australia appear to enter the country 
from the north or the north-west — from across the Timor Sea 
or the Torres Strait — and from there weave their way southwards 
across the continent. One has the impression that they 
represent the routes of the first Australians - and that they 
have come from somewhere else. 

How long ago? Fifty thousand years? Eighty or a hundred 
thousand years? The dates are insignificant compared to those 
from African prehistory. 

And here I must take a leap into faith: into regions I would 
not expect anyone to follow. 

I have a vision of the Songlines stretching across the continents 
and ages; that wherever men have trodden they have left 
a trail of song (of which we may, now and then, catch an 
echo); and that these trails must reach back, in time and space, 
to an isolated pocket in the African savannah, where the First 
Man opening his mouth in defiance of the terrors that surrounded 
him, shouted the opening stanza of the World Song, 
'i AM!' 

I HEARD THE NOISE of the plane coming in to land. I ran across 
the airstrip and was in time to watch Arkady get out carrying an 
'Eski'. The golden mop of Marian's hair followed. She looked 
deliriously happy. She was in another flowered cotton dress, no 
less ragged than the others. 

'Hey!' I shouted. 'This is wonderful.' 

'Hello, old mate!' Arkady smiled. He dropped the 'Eski' to 
the ground and drew us both into one of his Russian hugs. 
'Let me introduce you to the memsahib,' he said. 
'The what?' 
'The memsahib.' 
'Married?' 
'Yes.' 
'When?' 
'Three days ago,' said Marian. 'And we missed you and 
missed you!' 

'That is a piece of news!' 

'Isn't it?' she giggled. 'It was a bit sudden.' 

'I thought you were married,' I said severely to Arkady. 

'Was married,' said Arkady. 'But the day I left, I went home to 
change and there was this fat envelope on the doormat. I 
thought it looked oppressively official. "Leave it!" I said to 
myself. Then it occurred to me my divorce might have come 
through - and that was it. 

'I showered,' he went on. 'I changed. I mixed myself a drink, 
and relaxed into the sensation of being a free man. A fly had got 
into the studio and I kept looking at this bloody fly and saying to 
myself, "Now I'm free, there's something I've got to do." But I 
couldn't think what it was . . .' 

Marian stuck out her tongue. 

'Honestly, I couldn't!' he grinned. 'Then I jumped up, spilled 
the drink and shouted, "i KNOW! MARRY MARIAN!'" 

The three of us were walking towards Rolf's caravan. The pilot 
had gone to fetch the mail-bag from the store; and when he left 
Rolf ran after us. 

'Rolf,' I called once he was in earshot. 'These two are married.' 

'It had to happen one day,' he said. 

He had to stand on tiptoe when he kissed them both. 

I had scarcely noticed the clean-shaven, middle-aged Aboriginal 
who had also come on the plane and was tagging along 
behind Arkady. 

'Who's he?'I asked. 

'Tell it not in Gath,' Arkady whispered. 'He's the spokesman 
for the AmadeusMob. He's got Titus's tjuringas in his briefcase. I 
think I may have fixed it.' 

When we reached the caravan, Rolf went into a whirlwind of 
activity, arranged five camping chairs in a circle, and set about 
making coffee. 

The man from Amadeus stood watching: but within a couple 
of minutes Limpy appeared out of nowhere and, with a very 
friendly gesture, escorted him to the camp. 

'Now,' said Rolf, pouring the coffee. 'More about the 
wedding!' 

'Well, I got my divorce papers . . .' 

'And?' 

'I went over to this lady's house, and found two of her 
unworthy admirers in the kitchen. Very ratty looking, and more 
so when they saw me! So I called her out into the passage, and 
whispered in her ear. She nearly knocked me sideways with the 
force of her acceptance.' 

'Very romantic story,' said Rolf. 'A credit to you both!' 

'The lady', Arkady went on, 'then strode into the kitchen and 
with a positively beatific smile said, "Out! Sorry! We're busy. 
Out!'" 

'So they went,' Marian giggled. 'There's not much more to say. 
He went off to Darwin. I fixed up the house. I moped. He came 
back. There was a ceremony. A party. And now we're here!' 

'All the news is good,'said Arkady.'It's good news . . .fingers 
crossed .. . on the Titus front. It's good for Hanlon . . . nonmalignant 
blockage. It's good about the railway. They've looked 
again at the budget and can't see a way to build the bugger. 

Work's at a standstill. I'm out of a job, but who cares?' 
'And you know who hexed it?' I said. 
'Old Alan,' said Arkady. 
'Perhaps he sang it away?' 
'How's the writing?' he asked? 
'The usual mess,' I said. 
'Don't be so gloomy,' said Marian. 'We've got a lovely fish for 

supper.' 

In the 'Eski' there was a 4 lb barramunda and herbs to grill it 
with. They had also slipped in two bottles of white, from the 
Wynne Vineyard in South Australia. 

'Hey!' I said. 'That is special. Where did you get it?' 
'Influence,' said Arkady. 
'Where's Wendy?' Marian turned to Rolf. 
'Off with the kids, getting bush-tucker,' he said. 
About five minutes later Wendy drove up at the wheel of her 
old Land-Rover. The back was crammed with grinning chil
dren, some of whom were dangling goannas by the tail. 
'These two', said Rolf, 'are married.' 
'Oh, but how wonderful!' She jumped down and threw 
herself into Marian's arms, and Arkady then joined in. 

Counting Estrella, we were a party of six at supper. We ate 
and laughed and drank and told ridiculous stories. Estrella was 
a fund of the absurd. Her favourite character was the Catholic 
Bishop of the Kimberleys, who had once been a U-Boat 
commander and now fancied himself as an air ace. 

'This man', she said, 'is a fenomeno . . . una maravilla . . . 
He flies his aeroplano into middle of cumulo-nimbus to see 
which way up-or-downside he come out.' 

After coffee, I went to clear up the caravan for the newly 
weds. Arkady started up the Land Cruiser. 
He wanted to leave for Titus at eight. 
'Can I come this time?' I asked. 
He winked at Marian. 
'Sure you can come,'she said. 
We watched them go off to bed. They were two people made 
in heaven for each other. They had been hopelessly in love since 
the day they met, yet had gradually crept into their shells, 
glancing away, deliberately, in despair, as if it were too good, 
never to be, until suddenly the reticence and the anguish had 
melted and what should have been, long ago, now was. 

The night was clear and warm. Wendy and I dragged her 
bedstead outside the lock-up. She showed me how to focus the 
telescope and, before dropping off, I travelled around the 
Southern Cross. 

BY EIGHT WE WERE on the move. The morning was clear and 
fresh but was bound to heat up later. The man from Amadeus 
sat between Arkady and Marian, clinging to the briefcase. 
Limpy, spruced up for the occasion, sat with me in the back. 

We headed out towards the scene of my abortive kangaroo 
hunt, but then turned left along the back road to Alice. After 
about ten miles, the country changed from the yellow-flowering 
scrub to a rolling, open parkland of bleached grass and rounded 
eucalyptus trees — blue-green, the colour of olives with their 
leaves turning white in the wind; and if you soft-focused your 
eyes, you'd think you were in the lit-up Provencal landscape of 
Van Gogh's Cornfield near Aries. 

We crossed a creek and took another left along a sandy track. 
There was a neat corrugated shack set in a spinney of trees, and 
also Titus's Ford. A woman jumped to her feet and ran off. The 
dogs, as usual, howled. 

Titus, in shorts and a pork-pie hat, sat in front of a boiling 
billy on a pink foam-rubber mat. His father — a handsome, leggy 
old man with a covering of inch-long grey bristles — was 
stretched out in the dust, smiling. 

'You're early,' said Titus gravely. T wasn't expecting you 
before nine.' 

He amazed me by his ugliness: the spread of his nose, the 
wens that covered his forehead; the fleshy, down-hanging lip, 
and eyes that were hooded by the folds of his eyelids. 

But what a face! You never saw a face of such mobility and 
character. Every scrap of it was in a state of perpetual 
animation. One second, he was an unbending Aboriginal lawman; 
the next, an outrageous comic. 

'Titus,' said Arkady. 'This is a friend of mine from England, 
Bruce.' 

'How the Thatcher?'he drawled. 

'Still there,' I said. 

'Can't say I care for the woman.' 

He looked up at Marian, and said, 'I know you, don't I?' 

'But what you didn't know', Arkady chipped in, 'is that 
she's been my wife for four days.' 
'Nights, you mean,' said Titus. 
'I do.' 
'Very pleased to hear it,' he said. 'Lad like you needs a 
sensible wife.' 

'I do,' repeated Arkady, and hugged her. 

Arkady felt the time had come to introduce the man from 
Amadeus; but Titus raised his hand, and said, 'Wait!' 
He unpadlocked the door of the shack, leaving it half ajar, 
and got out a blue enamel mug for the extra visitor. 

The tea was ready. 

'Sugar?' he asked me. 

'No thanks.' 

'No,' he winked. 'I didn't think you looked the type.' 

Once we had finished tea, he jumped up and said, 'Right! To 
business!' 
He beckoned Limpy and the man from Amadeus to go on 
ahead. He then swivelled round to face us. 
'You mob,' he said, 'you'd be doing me a favour if you'd 
stay right here for half an hour.' 
The dead twigs crackled underfoot and the men were swallowed 
up among the trees. 
The old father lay there beaming, and dozed off to sleep. 

A tjuringa - it is worthwhile repeating - is an oval plaque 
made of stone or mulga wood. It is both musical score and 
mythological guide to the Ancestor's travels. It is the actual 
body of the Ancestor {pars pro toto). It is a man's alter ego; his 
soul; his obol to Charon; his title-deed to country; his passport 
and his ticket 'back in'. 

Strehlow gives a harrowing account of some Elders who 
discover their tjuringa storehouse has been raided by white 
men - and for whom this is the end of the world. He gives a 
joyful description of some other old men who have lent their 
tjuringas to their neighbours for a number of years and who, 
when they unwrap them on their return, break into a peal of 
happy song. 

I have also read an account of how, when a song cycle was 
sung in its entirety, the 'owners' would lay out their tjuringas 
end to end, in order, like the order of sleeping-cars on the 

Train Bleu. 

On the other hand, if you smashed or lost your tjuringa, you 
were beyond the human pale, and had lost all hope of 
'returning'. Of one young layabout in Alice, I heard it said, 'He 
hasn't seen his tjuringa. He don't know who he is.' 

In the Gilgamesh Epic, by way of extra comment, there is a 
strange passage in which Gilgamesh the King, weary of life, 
wishes to visit the Underworld to see his dead friend, the 'wild 
man' Enkidu. But the ferryman, Utnapishtim, says, 'No! You 
may not enter these regions. You have broken the tablets of 
stone.' 

Arkady was peering through the door of Titus's shack. 

'Don't whatever you do go in,' he spoke through his teeth, 
'but if you take a look in here, you may see something that'll 
surprise you.' 

I eased back on my haunches and peered in. It took time for 
my eyes to get used to the dark. On a chest beside Titus's bed 
was a stack of books, in English and German. On top of the pile 
was Nietzsche's Thus Spake Zarathustra. 

'Yes,' I nodded. 'I am very surprised.' 
In less than half an hour, we heard a whistle through the trees 
and watched the three men stepping towards us in single file. 
'Business settled!' said Titus, firmly, and sat down on his mat. 
'Tjuringas returned to their rightful owners.' 
The man from Amadeus looked relieved. The conversation 
turned to other things. 

Titus was the terror of the Land Rights Movement because 
whatever he had to say was bound to be original and uncalled 
for. He explained how, to the people of his grandparents' 
generation, the outlook had been infinitely bleaker than it was 
today. Watching their sons go to pieces, the Elders had 
frequently handed their tjuringas to the missionaries to prevent 
them being broken, lost or sold. One man worthy of their trust 
was the pastor of the Horn River Mission, Klaus-Peter Auricht. 
'My grandfather', Titus said, 'gave several tjuringas to old 
Auricht when this one'- he jerked his head at his snoring father 
— 'got taken with the booze.' 
Before dying in the late 1960s, Pastor Auricht had taken the 
'collection' to the Mission's headquarters in Alice, where it was 
kept under lock and key. When the 'activists' got wind of the 
fact that Germans were sitting on sacred property 'worth 
millions', they raised the usual ballyhoo and lobbied for their 
return to the people. 

'What the fuckers don't understand', drawled Titus, 'is there 
is no such person as an Aboriginal or an Aborigine. There are 
Tjakamarras and Jaburullas and Duburungas like me, and so on 
all over the country. 

'But if Leslie Watson', he went on, 'and that Canberra Mob 
so much as took one peep at my family's tjuringas, and if we're 
applying law to this situation, I'd be obliged to spear 'em, 
wouldn't I?' 

Titus shook with laughter, and we all did. 
'I have to tell you', he wheezed with a wicked grin, 'that since 
I saw you last, I've had some very funny visitors.' 

The first were some young architects who wanted - in the 
name of the Pintupi Council and in the hope of shutting his 
mouth - to build him a house. 

Titus snorted, 'They had in mind some kind of flat-roofed 
humpy. Fuckers! I told 'em if I was going to have a house, I 
wanted a house with a gable roof. I needed a library for my 
books. Living-room. Spare bedroom. Outside kitchen and 
shower. Otherwise I'd stay right here.' 

The next one had been even funnier: a glib-talking individual 
from the mining corporation, which wanted to run seismic lines 
through Titus's country. 

'Bastard!' he said. 'Shows me his geological survey map which, 
I might add, he's obliged to by the Law of the Crown and 
spouts a bunch of total garbage. "Here," I say, "give that to 
me!" I take a look at his synclines, and I have to say there's a fair 
chance of oil or natural gas over by Hunter's Bluff. "But look 
here!" I say, "We have different ways of looking at this. We've 
got a lot of important Dreamings in the area. We've got Native 
Cat. We've got Emu, Black Cockatoo, Budgerigar, two kinds of 
Lizard; and we've got an 'eternal home' for Big Kangaroo. At a 
guess I'd say he was your oilfield or whatever. But he's been 
sleeping there since the Dreamtime and, if I have a say in the 
matter, he's going to go on sleeping for ever."' 

Titus really enjoyed our visit. We had a lot more laughs. Even 
the po-faced man from Amadeus laughed. Then we piled into 
the Land Cruiser and hurried back to Cullen. 

I spent the afternoon clearing up my papers. We were starting 
for Alice in the morning. 

THE MAN FROM AMADEUS wanted to be dropped at the Horn 
River Settlement, so Arkady volunteered to drive him by the 
back road. It was far less frequented than the other, but 
everything was drying out and the mining-company man had 
made it in a car. 

We had stocked up with food and water and were saying 
goodbye to Rolf and Wendy, saying how we'd write and send 
books and always keep in touch, when Limpy strolled up and 
cupped his hands round Arkady's ear. 

'Sure, we'll take you,' he said. 

Limpy was in his best. He had a clean white shirt and a brown 
tweed jacket, and his hair and face were dripping with oil, 
making him look like a wet grey seal. 

What he wanted was to visit Cycad Valley: a place of 
immense importance on his Songhne, to which he had never 
been. 

Cycad Valley is a National Park - though well protected from 
the public - where there are a unique species of cabbage-palm 
and ancient stands of Native Pine. The Horn River runs through 
its gorge; Limpy's Dreaming, the Native Cat, ran straight down 
the middle of the stream-bed. The Native Cat, or Tjilpa, is not a 
real cat but a small marsupial (Dasyurus geoffreyi) with outsize 
whiskers and a banded tail held vertically above its back. It may, 
sadly, be extinct. 

There is a story that a young Tjilpa Ancestor, somewhere 
north of the MacDonnell Ranges, watched two eagle feathers 
fall from the sky and wanted to know where they came from. 
Following the Milky Way over the sandhills, he gradually 
attracted other Tjilpa Men, who joined the troop. On and on 
they went. Their fur was ruffled in the winter wind and their 
paws were cracked by the cold. 

At last they reached the sea at Port Augusta and there, 
standing in the sea, was a pole so tall it touched the sky (like 
Dante's Mountain of Purgatory). Its top was white with skyfeathers 
and its lower half white with sea-feathers. The Tjilpa 
Men laid the pole on its side and carried it to Central Australia. 

Limpy had never come here because of some long-standing 
feud. But he had recently heard over the bush telegraph that 
three of his distant relatives were living there - or, rather, dying 
there, alongside their tjuringa storehouse. He wanted to see 
them before they went. 

We drove for seven hours, from seven until two. Limpy sat in 
front between the driver and Marian, motionless but for a quick 
dart of the eyes to right or to left. 

About ten miles short of the Valley, the Land Cruiser bumped 
across a creek flowing south. 

Limpy suddenly bounced up like a jack-in-the-box, muttered 
things under his breath, rammed his head out of the driver's 
window (causing Arkady to swerve), repeated this on the other 
side, and then folded his arms and went silent. 

'What's going on?' asked Arkady. 

'Tjilpa Man go that way,' said Limpy, pointing south. 

At the road sign for Cycad Valley, we took a right hairpin 
bend and plunged down a steep track along the bed of the Horn. 
Pale-green water rushed over the white stones. We forded the 
river several times. There were river red-gums growing out of it. 

Limpy kept his arms folded, and said nothing. 

We came to the confluence of two streams: that is, we met the 
stream we had crossed higher up on the main road. This lesser 
stream was the route of the Tjilpa Men, and we were joining it at 
right angles. 

As Arkady turned the wheel to the left, Limpy bounced back 
into action. Again he shoved his head through both windows. 
His eyes rolled wildly over the rocks, the cliffs, the palms, the 
water. His lips moved at the speed of a ventriloquist's and, 
through them, came a rustle: the sound of wind through 
branches. 

Arkady knew at once what was happening. Limpy had learnt 
his Native Cat couplets for walking pace, at four miles an hour, 
and we were travelling at twenty-five. 

Arkady shifted into bottom gear, and we crawled along no 
faster than a walker. Instantly, Limpy matched his tempo to the 
new speed. He was smiling. His head swayed to and fro. The 
sound became a lovely melodious swishing; and you knew that, 
as far as he was concerned, he was the Native Cat. 

We drove for almost an hour; the road twisted through the 
purple cliffs. There were gigantic boulders smeared with black 
streaks, and the cycads, like magnified tree ferns, sprang up 
between them. The day was stifling. 

Then the river vanished underground, leaving on the surface 
a stagnant pool with reedy margins. A purple heron flew off and 
settled in a tree. The road had come to an end. 

We got out and followed Limpy along a well-worn footpath 
which threaded round the rocks and the water and came out 
into a basin of dark-red rock with receding layers of strata, 
reminding one of the seats in a Greek theatre. There was the 
usual tin shack under a tree. 

A middle-aged woman, her breasts ballooning inside her 
purple jumper, was dragging a branch of firewood to.the hearth. 
Limpy introduced himself. She flashed a smile, and beckoned us 
all to follow. 

As I wrote in my notebooks, the mystics believe the ideal man 
shall walk himself to a 'right death'. He who has arrived 'goes 
back'. 

In Aboriginal Australia, there are specific rules for 'going 
back' or, rather, for singing your way to where you belong: to 
your 'conception site', to the place where your tjuringa is stored. 
Only then can you become — or re-become — the Ancestor. The 
concept is quite similar to Heraclitus's mysterious dictum, 
'Mortals and immortals, alive in their death, dead in each 
other's life.' 

Limpy hobbled ahead. We followed on tiptoe. The sky was 
incandescent, and sharp shadows fell across the path. A trickle 
of water dribbled down the cliff. 

'Tjuringa place up there!' said Limpy, softly, pointing to a 
dark cleft high above our heads. 

In a clearing there were three 'hospital' bedsteads, with mesh 
springs and no mattresses, and on them lay the three dying men. 
They were almost skeletons. Their beards and hair had gone. 

One was strong enough to lift an arm, another to say something. 
When they heard who Limpy was, all three smiled, spontaneously, 
the same toothless grin. 

Arkady folded his arms, and watched. 

'Aren't they wonderful ?' Marian whispered, putting her hand 
in mine and giving it a squeeze. 

Yes. They were all right. They knew where they were going, 
smiling at death in the shade of a ghost-gum. 
